JohiuClimacus 

THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



TIUXSLATION 

BY 

COLM LUIBHEID and 

N01<M\N RUSSEI.L 

NOTES ON TlUNSlJVriON 

BY 

NOl^'lAN RUSSELL 

t 

IXTROnL'CTION 

BY 

KALLISTOS WARE 



l^KEFACE 

BY 

COLiVl LIJIBHEID 



SPCK . LONDON 



6-P>^ to. //S-C^ 



Cover Art 

A graduate of The Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts In Philadelphia, cover artist 
ANDRIJ MADAY has won numerous awards for his graphic designs and prints. He 
has exhibited his paintings and woodcuts in approximately eighty shows in the United 
States and has permanent collections at universities in Italy, Canada, and the United 
States. Mr. Maday's art, based on simple rectangular and circular designs, is inspired 
by ancient Ukrainian icons and conveys Mr. Maday's own deep mystical experience 
and rich Ukrainian Eastern Orthodox heritage. 



First published in the United States 
in 1982 by Paulist Press 

Copyright © 1982 by the 

Missionary Society of St. Paul 

the Apostle in the State of New York 

Published in Great Britain in 1982 

by SPCK 

Hoty Trinity Church 

Marylebone Road 

London NWl 4DU 

ISBN: 281 0J782 .1 



Printed and bound in the 
United States of America 



Contents 



FOREWORD 



IX 



ABBREVIATIONS 



PREFACE 



XI 



INTRODUCTION 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



71 



INDEXES 



293 



Translators of This V^olume 
COLM LUIBHEID was born in Dublin in 1936 and received his 
B.A. and M.A. from University College, Dublin. He was awarded a 
Ph.D. in Classics from Princeton University. Since 1961 he has been a 
member of the teaching staff at University College, Galway. His 
scholarly interests focus on the early Church in the eastern half of the 
Mediterranean between the third and fifth centuries. In addition to 
publishing two books on Eusebius, he is preparing a volume on John 
Cassian for this series. Dr. Luibheid lives with his wife and four chil- 
dren in the village of Abbeyknockmoy, near Galway. 

REV. NORMAN VICTOR RUSSELL was born in Belfast in 1945 
and was educated at King's College, University of London. Subse- 
quently he took his theology degrees at Oxford. In 1971 he was or- 
dained Deacon in the Church of England. After being received into 
the Catholic Church a year later he was ordained a priest of the Con- 
gregation of the Oratory. Eather Russell is an editor of Sobornost and 
has contributed to the English editions of the Philokatia and The Lives 
of the Desert Fathers. 



Author of the Introduction 
BISHOP KALLISTOS WARE was born in Bath in 1934 and was 
educated at the Westminster School, London, and Magdalen College, 
Oxford where he studied Classics, Philosophy and Theology. Re- 
ceived into the Orthodox Church in 1958, he was ordained a priest in 
1966, the same year he took monastic vows at the Monastery of St 
John the Theologian in Patmos. In 1982 he was consecrated titular 
Bishop of Diokleia and appointed assistant bishop in the Orthodox 
Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain. Since 1966 he has been 
been Spalding Lecturer in Eastern Orthodox Studies at Oxford, and 
in 1970 he became a Fellow at Pembroke College. He is the co-editor 
of Sobornost and the author of many books, including The Orthodox 
Church. 



FOREWORD 



If there are numerous and well-founded doubts concerning the 
few spare details of the biography of John Climacus, or John Scholas- 
ticus, there is little risk of over-estimating the influence of the treatise 
which emerged from the pen of this notably elusive figure whose life 
touched the end of the sixth and the beginning of the seventh centu- 
ries. The Ladder of Divine Ascent is undeniably a classic of early Chris- 
tian spirituality. It offers advice, counsel and guidance to those 
capable of embarking on that difficult road whose summit is encoun- 
ter with God, and it embodies the fruit both of long personal experi- 
ence and of the intensely dynamic insights of earlier generations of 
men caught up in the first great surge of monasticism. 

The present translation is based on the text printed by Migne — 
Patrologia Graeca 88. Apart from the details to be gathered in the stan- 
dard handbooks of patrology, a most useful and wide-ranging bibliog- 
raphy has been supplied by Guerric Couilleau at the end of his 
article, /eaw Climaque in Dictionnaire de Spiritualite, Ease, lii-liii (Paris) 
1972. This is to be strongly recommended to anyone wishing to ex- 
plore the various issues raised by the impact of The Ladder of Divine 
Ascent. 



IX 



ABBREVIATIONS 



PREFACE 



DHGE: 

DS: 

DTC: 

ET: 

HTM; 



PG: 
PL: 
Phil.: 



Rader: 



Dictionnaire dVistoire et di geographic ecclhiastiques (Paris) 

Dictionnaire de spiritualiti (Paris) 

Dictionnaire de theologie catholique (Paris) 

English translation 

St. John Climacus, The Ladder of Divine Ascent, translated by 

Archimandrite Lazarus (Moore) (revised edition by the 

Holy Transfiguration Monastery: Boston, Massachusetts 

1978). 

J. -P. Migne, Patrologia Graeca (Paris) 

J. -P. Migne, Patrologia Latina (Paris) 

St. Nikodimos of the Holy Mountain and St. Makarios of 

Corinth, The Philokalm, translated by G.E.H. Palmer, P. 

Sherrard and K. Ware, vol. 1 (London & Boston 1979). 

Matthew Rader, editor of the text printed in Migne. 



References to St. John Climacus, The Ladder, are given as follows: first 
the number of the step; then the column number from PG 88; finally 
the page number of the present translation. Thus "4 (677C), p. 45" 
signifies: Step 4, PG 88, col. 677C, p. 45 below. 

To the Shepherd (Ad Pastorem) is cited as Past., followed by the 
chapter number and the column number in PG 88, and then the page 
number of the HTM translation. 

Old Testament references are to the Septuagint. 



To Western eyes, the monk increasingly is a figure of yesterday, 
and the commonest images of him are of the kind to make easy the 
patroni/.ing smile, the confidently dismissive gesture, or that special 
tolerance extended to the dotty and the eccentric. Around Friar 
Tuck, with his cheerful obesity, and Brother Francis, harming no one 
as he' talks to birds and animals, vaguer ghosts manage to cluster, 
gaunt, cowled, faintly sinister, eyes averted'or else looking heaven- 
ward, a skull clutched in a wasted hand, with gloom arising and 
laughter dead. Somewhere in the background there are bells and 
hymns, and psalms chanted long after midnight; and, as if to confirm 
that these are only the leftovers of a past surely and mercifully gone, 
there is the dumb presence of all those European monasteries visited 
for ten scheduled minutes during a guided tour, or else sought out on 
warmer evenings by courting couples, 

But for the Christian, that is, for someone who believes that there 
is a God, that God has manifested Himself in historical surroundings 
in the person of Christ, and that insights and obligations are thereby 
held up to everybody, the monk cannot easily be shrugged off. Cer- 
tainly in the aftermath of the immense changes that have occurred in 
the outlook of Christians since the end of World War II, the future of 
the religious order or community as such may well be problematic, 
but this in no way alters the deeper challenge presented by the monk. 
For here is someone who, so it would appear, has deliberately with- 
drawn from the usual patterns of living. 

In this matter, of course, one has to tread with great care, since 
the meaning of such a withdrawal is not absolute, but is conditioned 



XI 



I'KII Acr, 



l>y iiiui imiM he iiiKlcrsinoil m \rtti\^ n| tlic MKftti.s rtiid customs of the 
era in which ii niciii s. Ami cvrti il tiiMuruul evidence can help to iso- 
late what seem lo he ihe characieiislrc Iraliires ot a widely shared out- 
look at a given time, this siitl leaves nitiMly untouched the precise set 
of reasons impelling a particular person (o choose a type of living that 
involves some form of rciiunciatmri, s.inie decision to opt out of the 
way of the world. 

But again, the difficulties iiet,'iii to multiply. A linguistic usage, 
so long employed by Christians that it has the look of being quite sim- 
ply "natural," surrounds the individual monk with a wall of venera- 
ble words, a wall more solid and enduring than any that may set the 
boundaries of the area where he actually lives. For the talk is of 
"withdrawal" from "the world," of "renunciation," of a "monastic 
life" in contrast with the way other people happen to live, of being 
"apart from," "away from" the rest of mankind, of pursuing a "dedi- 
cated" and "consecrated" path. And this language, with its emphasis 
on the differences between the monk and all others, very quickly be- 
gins to generate something more than a mere set of descriptions. It 
begins to imply a value system, a yardstick of achievement and worth 
until at last, and not surprisingly, there grows the irresistible urge to 
speak of a "higher," "fuller," and "more perfect" way of life. 

Words of this sort, words lined and laced with implications of 
particular values, are the co-relations of belief, of commitment, and of 
action. Language of this kind, endlessly repeated by ecclesiastical 
writers and preachers, has long been characteristic of Christian prac- 
tice and has been received largely without demur. But the power of 
words is not a constant; and the impact of a terminology that claims, 
among other things, that the clerical, and specifically the monastic, 
way is a "higher" calling grows greater or lesser in proportion to the 
number and availability of competing terminologies. And when, as in 
the last quarter of the twentieth century, there is in fact a prolifera- 
tion of serious and compelling value systems, then the force of an ex- 
clusively Christian rhetoric is inevitably weakened, even for 
Christians. The mere assertion of a value is no longer matched, as it 
used to be in other days, by a willingly affirmative respon.se, and the 
timely quotation from Leo XIII or from Thomas Aquinas cannot 
now be relied on to still doubts or to answer questions. 

There is in all of this a situation unique in Christian experience, 
for it has long been a popular notion that Christianity is a religion of 
the book; and it has certainly been the case that the Bible, the com- 



XI 1 



PREFACE 



mentary, and the exegetical tract have supplied the material and the 
language in which the sermon, the homily, and the theological analy- 
sis have been firmly grounded. The pastoral letter, the authorized 
hymn, and the training manual for future clerics have extended the 
range and the reach of a discourse whose themes and elaborations 
have reverberated ceaselessly in the consciousness of believers. Year 
after year, scripted prayers have been read aloud to a congregation 
that is either silent or else invited to repeat them, and stock themes of 
petition or praise, with all that this implies by way of what is accept- 
able or not, have directed the minds of worshipers to a landscape of 
concern, a domain of reality that for long had the appearance of being 
unique. Until, that is, the coming of other rhetorics and other certain- 
ties. So that now there are, in a sense, too many books, too many 
claims to attention in a world geared for the instant transmission of 
every idea, event, and apocalypse. And the Christian, bombarded 
from every quarter by the exigencies of the day, is less and less able to 
operate exclusively within the frontiers established for his forebears 
by a language rooted in biblical detail. , 

Given those circumstances, it is reasonable to wonder how a 
C!]hristian may now cope with the vast literature to which he is heir. It 
is also reasonable to anticipate that he will approach it with some- 
thing less than automatic deference. And amid all the competing 
voices, his capacity to deploy a commitment and a sustained interest 
may well diminish as he strives to assemble for himself and for his 
friends criteria of evaluation that make some kind of accepted sense. 
I!(»w, for instance, is he to approach a work like The Ladder of Divine 
Ahent by John C^limacus? By what means can he integrate it within 
hiii own heritage and his immediate environment? How can this text, 
over fourteen hundred years old, have any bearing on the problems of 
a Christian in the last quarter of the twentieth century? Such ques- 
tions arise in relation to any classic book. But for the moment they 
iiiiisi be directed to this treatise, which had a very considerable influ- 
ence during a lengthy era in the history of the Church. And, in any 
Cilsc, if something useful can be said of The Ladder of Divine Ascent, it 
tuny coniribiite a little to the resolution of the problem presented to- 
day hy the figure of the monk. 

The selling at least can be readily established. The Ladder is a 
Drodui't ol that great surge of monasticism which ;ip[ieared first in 
rKVpl during the third century, sfiread rapidly through all ot i'.nvtrrti 
( IhriMctidom, and eventually reached the West by wuy o( the inrdnii 



Xili 



PRKFACE 



PREFACE 



ing zeal of figures such as John Cassian. '['he general history of this 
most influential development in the life of the early Church is well 
known, even if details and certain interpretations continue to preoc- 
cupy scholars, and there is no need to attempi here a sketch of what 
has been so well described by others. But in justice to the author of 
the Ladder it would be important to make a few preliminary com- 
ments in order to lessen the possibility of serious misunderstanding. 

First, it should be observed that no discussion of early monasti- 
cism is complete without its due quota of lugubrious tales. The ap- 
palled scholar and the generous opponent of zeaTot'ry carTchoose from 
and grade a seemingly endless supply of horror stories, and someone 
familiar with the relevant literature finds himself on the lookout for 
the better-known figures: the monk who constructed for himself a 
cell too tiny to permit him ever to stand up or to lie down, the stylites 
who perched for decades on top of their sunscorched pillars, the 
Egyptian whose boast was that he was closer to being a corpse than 
anyone else. These are not the figments of some Gothic imagination, 
and frequently one may construct from various sources solid bio- 
graphical details. Take, for instance, the case of Barsauma, a fifth-cen- 
tury monk from Syria, a region notable for the numbers who 
displayed a positive genius in the extravagant penances they managed 
to devise for themselves. Barsauma first had himself chained to a 
rock-face, and only when it was pointed out to him that he would be 
unlikely to survive long enough to practice the penance he had in 
view did he change his plans. Instead he took to wearing an iron tu- 
nic, vowed never to sit or to recline, hung himself in an upright posi- 
tion whenever he had to sleep, and attracted in this way fascinated 
and uncritical disciples who, at his bidding, wrecked and looted syna- 
gogues in the name of the God they all worshiped. 

Barsauma was not unique, and the Ladder too has its own contri- 
bution to make to this ima ge of extremism: — . 

. . . there were men in hardship and bowed down to the end 
of their lives, going about ea ch day _ _in sadness, t heir bodies' 
wounds stinkingj)fjxittSiii£ss-aiKi'yet unnoticed by them. 
They forgot to eat their bread; th ejr drink was mixed with 
tears. They at£ dust jnd^ashes instead of bread; their bones 
stuck to their flesh and they wSre-dFted'Tip like grass. . . . 
You could see the tongues on some of them dry and hanging 



from their mouths in the manner of dogs. Some pun isjied 
themselves in_the_b] a2ing sun, othe rs tortured themselves in 
the cold, while others, again, drank only as much water as 
would keep them from dying of thirst. . . . With knees like 
wood, as a result of all the prostrations, with eyes dimmed 
and sunken, with hair gone and cheeks wasted and scalded 
by many hot tears, with faces pale and worn, they were no 

di fferent from corp ses- Their breasts were livid from all the 

beatings, which had even made them spit blood. There was 
no rest for them in beds, no clean and laundered clothing. 
They were bedraggled, dirty, and verminous. rfStep 5), -.— 

f 

Such tales earn a disproportionate measure of attention among 

many of those dealing with the phenomenon of early monasticism. 
The stories are too vivid, too imperious for the imagination to be able 
to remain unengaged, and the decent witness or the gentle historian, 
accustomed to worthy ideals and the advantages of hygiene, recoils in 
distaste from what he takes to be the rep ulsive excesses of guilt-r i dden 
luul maddened wretches. Indeed, so intense is the inclination to dwell 
on the specl:acular or tBe repulsive aspects of the first Christian 
monks that the attempt to describe their hopes and practices regular- 
ly degenerates into caricature or well-bred irony. And this is surely 
tvgrcHable since even the available evidence points unambiguously to 
ihc fact that very many of the first monks were wholly admirable 
men, gentle, wise, and loving, capable ot jrearTiero ism^ndlnovedTiy 
Hti ;ibid7ng t rust in ^ o9^ Figures remarkable by any standard 
emerged from their monastic surroundings to leave an enduring 
murk on the character and quality of their times; and in the fourth 
tind (ifih centuries some of the most effective men, some of the men 
nuiM iible to provide leadership and inspiration to countless thou- 
Ntind.s, were actually dedicated ascetics. In other words, the emphasis 
Dti ilu' sensational features of early monastic life is apt to provide a 
lopsided and seriously misleading historical picture. 

But whether the focus of attention be on the saint, on the fanatic, 
or indi'cd on the common and ordinary human, no one would deny 
itiiii Inirdship and strict regimentation marked the lives of the early 
ttioiiks And this too calls for brief comment, since a complex net- 
work o| incentives — religious, psychological, social, and anthropo- 
toUICul is in play whenever the issue of discipline is seriously 



XIV 



XV 



PKKl ACE 



invoked. There seems to bean aMriicimii nr ilu ipit im Ic »^ «lmnpliiie, 
irrespective of the values that may hiipprn tn iiiianltf il mi a j(ivcn 
context. A strangely recurrent terminology shirws n|) aiimtij^ (.In-is- 
tians, Marxists, Manichees, army otliicrs, rcviihiiiKiirti i«'s, ti^Ui wing 
extremists, and racists, and it consecrates ilic iiiIktcih wuiili nt re- 
straint, self-sacrifice, manliness, solidarity wiili one'i *ninrailrs, the 
"cause," the need to struggle, and the requirement i<» ll^{ht against 
sin, corruption, and weakness. Translated inii> prueli.c, ihis viKnihu- 
lary can be brought to exemplify what is mamlesily i i«lii "i' ""'gh- 
teous. Such proclaimed values draw continued adminiiinn, regardless 
of the brotherhood that may happen to have lietrayrd tlietii, and pre- 
cisely because they have long held so great an afii>eal tor so many, it is 
foolish to try (as some do) to confine within a c<)nifortal>le gencrali/.a- 
tion the reasons why men in their thousands joiti a pariieiilar move- 
ment. A student of motives is not much helped by the .siateinent that, 
for instance, the national humiliation stemming from (he \ersailles 
treaty was the cause of the growing membership of the Na/i party, or 
the economic and social dislocation of the third century was responsi- 
ble for the rise of monasticism. 

However, there is one feature of the unrelaxed .severity and disci- 
pline of early monastic life that certainly ought to be adverted U) and 
that offers a clue to the reasons why some men resolve to join a reli- 
gious community; namely, the undeniable correlation between hard- 
ship and an intense marshaling of inner, and frequently unsuspected, 
resources. Words cannot really encompass what happens here. But 
the fact seems well established. In the evidence of the Gulag Archi- 
pelago, in the testimony of men like Solzhenitsyn, lertz, Panin, and 
Shifrin, in the records of the tidal wave of misery let loose by German 
Nazism, there is a persistent and humbling proof of the capacity of 
individiials, trapped amid the worst conditions of deprivation, to un- 
lock an inner dynamism, which often is manifested as a commanding 
faith in God and which must never be confused with the understan- 
dable motive of escapism. It has happened too often in twentieth-cen- 
tury experience to be trivialized or explained away; and somewhere 
within it lies a common bond with the ordeals, voluntarily undertak- 
en, and the achievements of the first monks of the Church, Sharp dif- 
ferences of time and circumstance do not alter the shared character of 
the early saint and that prisoner of our day who has climbed beyond 
gross suffering and oppression to arrive at a level of richness beyond 



XVI 



PREFACE 



all common imagining. And because this is so, the decision of a n 
to take on himself the discipline of a hard religious life may not, af 
all, be so odd and unintelligible. 

That many of the first monks had glimpsed a connection 
tween the experience of hardship and an enhanced spirituality is e 
dent in the writings of the early Church. And in the neighborhood 
that perceived connection were other sources of the resolve to en 
on a monastic life. There was, for instance, the belief that, given 
right conditions and preparation, a man may even in this life w( 
his passage upward into the actual presence of God; and there, if G 
so chooses, he can receive a direct and intimate knowledge of the 
vine Being. Such knowledge is not the automatic or the guarantt 
conclusion of a process. It is not like the logical outcome of a faultie 
ly constructed argument. There is no assurance that a man will co 
to it at the end of a long journey. But to many it was a prize an. 
prospect so glittering that all else looked puny by comparison; a 
besides, there were tales told of some who, so it seemed, had actus 
been granted that supreme gift of a rendezvous. 

Something of what was meant is found in a section of the Con 
sions of Augustine: 

Imagine a man in whom the tumult of the flesh goes silent, 
in whom the images of earth, of water, of air and of the skies 
cease to resound. His soul turns quiet and, self-reflecting no 
longer, it transcends itself. Dreams and visions end. So too 
does all speech and every gesture, everything in fact which 
comes to be only to pass away. All these things cry out: "We 
did not make ourselves. It is the Eternal One who made us." 
And after they have said this, think of them falling silent, 
turning to listen to the One Who created them. And imagine 
Him speaking. Himself, and not through the medium of all 
those things. Speaking Himself. So that we could hear His 
( word, not in the language of the flesh, not through the 

speech of an angel, not by way of a rattling cloud or a myste- 
i rious parable. But Himself The One Whom we love in ev- 

i erything. imagine we could hear Him without them. 

Reaching out with speeding thought we come to Him, to the 
Ktcrnal Wisdom which outlasts everything. And imagine if 
sight of 1 liin were ke|)i available, while all lesser sights were 



PRKl'ACK 



taken away. Think of this cncoimicr. sd/iujl, fll>Mirliiii«. 
drawing the witness into the dt•plh^ nl \<>\. iMrnuil life 
would be of a kind with this moment ol nn.lnM.indinji. 
{Confessions ix, 10, 25) 

Augustine is talking of a one-to-one cncounicr wiih (iod. I hat 
anyone should dream of such an encounter in this life riu.y sectn hold 
and surprising to a believer from the twentieth ccnuny. surruundcd 
as he is by countless men of goodwill unable to accept that tlicrc is a 
God at all. But the dream was clearly there, and there was much to 
keep it alive. To writers of the fourth, fifth, and sixth ccnuines, the 
cultural and intellectual resources of the age supported them and co- 
operated with them as they confidently formulated convictions of the 
kind laid out by Augustine. They had, too, a thriving, dynamic sense 
of the reality of God. And from this they turned to the life and, espe- 
cially the resurrection of Christ as an unambiguous proof of the exis- 
tence'of a sure road, a high road, into the actual living presence of the 
Creator Journey's end might not perhaps be reached until the after- 
life but to these men, with their great capacity to love, their hunger 
for salvation, and their bitter awareness of the fact of sin, the way was 
already marked out, and only the obstacles had to be overcome. 

But whatever the combination of motives that might operate for 
individuals entering on the path of monasticism^here was one^gctor 
that set the t one of all else; namely, the d^tinction, profb^^ndly felt 
betw^'i^TSSnUnd body, a"dittinction reguIiFIfH^Ta^FSt^d in terms of 
a c^iiiTTi^r-^TTdTSSr7nd^ without respite, between two irreconcilable 
ant^nists yoked together for a lifetime. The body was the foe— 
gross corrupt, and greedy, reaching out for its own crass satisfactions 
or else generating subtle, even civilized, needs against which the soul 
had always to struggle. This notion of a deadly antagonism at the 
very center of a man's own being was a theme older than Christian- 
ity but in the literature of early monasticism it became a focal point 
of agonized reflection. For to be alive at all is to be in the world, en- 
suring one's survival, entering into relationships with others, gazing 
on the beauty rising before the eye, encountering at every turn the 
achievements of art and intellect, feeling the stirrings of delight, and 
discovering the outward reach of desire, of passion, and of the urge to 
possess And all this in the arena where the body feels most at home. 
Even the hours awake and the sleep of the night are but aspects ot the 



< «o>^'i^h ^"■'''' 



XVUl 



PREFACE 



body in command; and, seemingly, no hour or place can offer the soul 
an instant of unthreatened peace and recreation. 

And so it is that John Climacus, facing the spectacle of unending 
war between soul and body, finds himself compelled to write as fol- 
lows: 

By what rule or manner can I bind this body of mine? By 
what precedent can I judge him? Before I can bind him he is 
let loose, before I can condemn him I am reconciled to him, 
before I can punish him 1 bow down to him and feel sorry 
for him. How can I hate him when my nature disposes me to 
love him? How can I break away from him when 1 am bound 
to him forever? How can I escape from him when he is going 
to rise with me? How can I make him incorrupt when he has 
received a corruptible nature? How can I argue with him 
when all the arguments of nature are on his side? ... If I 
strike him down 1 have nothing left by which to acquire vir- 
tues. I embrace him. And I turn away from him. What is this 
mystery in me? What is the principle this mixture of body 
and soul? (Step 15) 

More typical, perhaps, was the following reflection by Basil of 
Oaesarea, himself the single most influential figure in the monasti- 
L'ism of the eastern half of the Roman Empire; 






I 



I'here is only one way out of this, namely, total separation 
from all the world. But withdrawal from the world does not 
mean physical removal from it. Rather, it is the withdrawal 
I by the soul of any sympathy for the body. One becomes 
stateless and homeless. One gives up possessions, friends, 
ownership of property, livelihood, business connections, so- 
cial life and scholarship. The heart is made ready to receive 
the imprint of sacred teaching, and this making ready in- 
volves the unlearning of knowledge deriving from evil hab- 
its. I'o write on wax, one has first to erase the letters 
previously written there, and to bring sacred teaching to the 
Noui one must begin by wi|)ing out preoccupations rooted in 
nnlinary liabil.s. (iJa.sil, J w tier 2) 



XIX 



PKl.rACE 



John Climacus, Basil, and i.umy nil,,-. I.m.I.hk U^inw^ wt-rc i>ro. 
claiming in effect that the only sale p/c w.is hcHVt-nw anl, that the 
onlv unblemished gesture was tho siK.ia! nl |..->ivcr or ..I cmnpunc- 
tion, that the only secure involvcmcni with mhtTS wi.s the unstinted 
offer of charity. Temperament and availahle insinixs would deter- 
mine the extent and the degree to whirh, for it.dividiiiiU, all this 
would be translated mto hatred of the body and hrtuc ol the wurld^ 
But whatever the disparate motives at work, a man sci/ed by a love ot 
God and a man laceratmg himself in a frcn/y of penance had at least 
in common the abiding sense of a war withu. ihcm, ol the soiM tac.ng 
the body in an unending and possibly mortal combat. No other (actor 
was more decisive in shaping the morality and the disciplinary prac- 
tices of the first monks, and its influence can still be .seen at work, tor 
instance, in many of the pronouncements on the subject ot marriage 
or in the nervous efforts of some ecclesiastical celibates to cope with 
the fact that half, if not more, of the members of (he human race are 

women. - 

But a vastly more troublesome problem arises in the context ot 
this deeply felt antagonism between soul and body, and it is a prob- 
lem that will today strike someone reading The Ladder oj Divtne Ascent. 
It is also an issue that can be touched on here in only the briefest fash- 
ion There is now in the consciousness of the West a terminology and 
a set of value judgments centered on the person. From the era of the 
Renaissance and Reformation up to the present time, there has been a 
steady progress in the insistence on the reality and the inherent 
worth of the individual. Some philosophers, of course, would argue 
that man the word-spinner has in this merely demonstrated once 
again his capacity to sublimate reality and has only succeeded in hid- 
ing from himself that he is no more-and no less— than a very com- 
plex organism. But this is not a widely shared view, Instead, there is 
much talk of human rights, of one man's being as good as another, ot 
the right of the poor to share in the goods of the world, of one-man- 
one-vote What all this has done to belief in God is a theme of mapr 
import However, on a more restricted plane, a difficulty for anyone 
today reading The Ladder of Divine Ascent or similar texts is that in 
these a somewhat different view of the person is at work. If modern 
Christianity has invested heavily in the notion of the value of the m- 
dividual person, it has been at the cost of a seeming incompatibility 
with much that was felt and believed in the early Church. 

Still whether incompatible or not with the modern sense of the 



XX 



PREFACE 



self and of identity, The Ladder of Divine Ascent remains what it has 
long been, a text that had a profound influence, lasting many centur- 
ies, in the monastic centers of the Greek-speaking world. As such it 
deserves at least a hearing, if only to ensure that the awareness of the 
(Christian past is not impoverished. And in any case it has in its own 
fashion a contribution to make to the problem of what the monk 
could possibly signify in the life of today. For the Ladder was, of 
course, addressed specifically to monks. 

Hardly anything is known of the author, and the most reliable 
information about him can be summarized in the statement that he 
lived in the second half of the sixth century, survived into the sev- 
enth, passed forty years of solitude at a place called Tholas; that he 
became abbot of the great monastery of Mount Sinai and that he com- 
posed there the present text. The Ladder was written for a particular 
group, the abbot and community of a monastic settlement at Raithu 
on the Gulf of Suez. It was put together for a restricted audience and 
to satisfy an urgent request for a detailed analysis of the special prob- 
lems, needs, and requirements of monastic li£e. John Climacus was 
not immediately concerned to reach out to the general mass of believ- 
ers; and if, eventually, the Ladder became a classic, spreading its ef- 
fects through all of Eastern Christendom, the principal reason lay in 
its continuing impact on those who had committed themselves to a 
disciplined observance of an ascetic way as far removed as possible 
Irom daily concerns. 

Not much is actually said of the reasons for joining a monastery. 
Men become monks "either for the sake of the coming kingdom, or 
bcciiuse of the number of their sins, or on account of their love of 
( iod" (Step 1). But once inside the walls, the monk, according to John, 
hiis to live under the scrutiny of a God Who is undoubtedly loving, 
merciful, and omnipotent, but Who is also just, stern, and conscious 
of protocol. Like the emperor, in fact: 

Those of us wishing to stand before our King and God and 
to speak to Him should not rush into this without some 
preparation, lest it should happen that — seeing us from afar 
without arms and without the dress appropriate to those 
who appear before the King — He should command His ser- 
vnnts and I lis slaves to lay hold of us, and to drive us out of 
His sight, to tear up our pctiti<jns and to throw them in our 
faces. (Step 2H) 



XXI 



PKKl ACE 



PREFACE 



The emperor in ihc world known to John, presided over . socety 
iS d V sCfied with the eo-nmon man living at the base of a tr.an- 

I Icrapex was rem<,te, distant, and fearsome. Most <,f those who 

ml into he imperial presence would do so w,th nerv<>us apprehen- 

r^irh a sense of risking some terrible displeasure. Bm at least for 

ih m^ OH y of hif subiect' the emperor lived far away m a distant 
the ma,onty oi i ^^^ ^,^^^^^ ^^^^,^g and 

And in ct= the analogy Kere is not properly understood, J,>hn offer. 

some others: 

If you ever found yourself having to appear before a human 

lols'eff in priyer. Perhaps you have never -0^1 ^ejo 
iudge nor witnessed a cross-examination. In that case, take 
your cue from the way patients appeal to surgeons prior to 
an operation or a cautery. (Step 28) 

"With no anaesthetic," the modern scholiast "^'g^t -dd. 

Before the face of this King, the monk puts on a lifetime pertor 
nuance one moreover, that at every turn is imperiled by virtually un- 

hS hazards. Had John lived in the -^^'^^ ---[,. ^ut" 2 i 
have spoken of the monk as journeying through a minefield, but as it 
tth image of the strait way suffices, and that a ---"^^j^lf j^^i 
c^me when it would be otherwise, when a man might briefly re ax, is 
nowhere hinted at in the course of the long, often melancholy, analy- 

tion sufficient for the weight and gravity of his sins: 

Let no one who grieves for his sins expect -assurance at the 
hour of death. There can be no reassurance about the un- 
known. (Step 5) 
And he has to beware even this insecurity, since "to despair is ... to 

'^'V:t rhoTeToin-rrt La^^er of D...n. A.en. is that a great 
amount of wisdom a'nd insight is available to enable the monk to cope 



xxii 



with the perils of his situation. There is knowledge to be handed on 
to him, and practical steps that, if taken, must show him how to trans- 
form his life, how to transcend his condition, provided he has within 
himself the necessary faith and zeal. The form of John's text — with its 
thirty sections or steps — is suggested by the biblical image of the lad- 
der of Jacob, and such an image, rooted in the certainties of scripture, 
must be taken to imply that despite the myriad difficulties rising up 
before him, the way of the monk is not in fact impassable. But it has 
its own special character and its own particular objectives, and these 
must be understood from the beginning and accepted for what they 
are. The monk, after all, 

finds himself in an earthly and defiled body, but pushes him- 
self into the rank and status of the incorporeal. . . . With- 
drawal from the world is a willing hatred of all that is 
materially prized, a denial of nature for the sake of what is 
, above nature. (Step 1) 

In other words, the monk, unlike the majority of believers, is so over- 
whelmed by his sense of the reality of God and of the afterlife that he 
turns away, by a deliberate choice, from the concerns of the here and 
now, renounces as far as possible the alliance of soul and body, and 
lives to the extent that he can the life of the spirit. Of all tasks this is 
surely the most formidable; and yet, John is saying, at the top of the 
ladder, on the thirtieth step of striving, there awaits a promise for the 
man whose heart longs to be there: love clarified, God made present. 
To get there, however, the monk has first to enter the arena of 
renunciation. It is easily said, and the inexperienced onlooker will 
have his own way of constructing the image of the bolt on the cloister 
gate, of the cell entered for a lifetime. Or the talk can be of what a 
man has decided to forego — a varied diet, physical comfort, sexual ex- 
perience, possessions, the security and self-respect provided by the 
love and esteem of one's time, of neighbors, of society. And these are 
indeed among all that the monk has decided to renounce. But wherev- 
er a man is, however far he has retreated from what the world may 
have lo offer, he remains a man, endowed, among other attributes, 
with a capacity to remember and to imagine, and in the drabbest by- 
Wiiy of the rockiest desert he would be less than human if he did not 
lliinii sonielimes ot the road noi taken — which would mean ihiii he 
hud no! vet achieved retmnciniion. 



f 



k.... 



XXIII 



i»i<M a<;r 



PREFACE 



And suppose that Ik n^^ «' '"-«' '" '«*"'''' '"' " """"'" '" 

taste^reat remembered, dr.nm-.! (.. <!,. lU.I Hh. nMnl... s .1 the 

world He has .t.ll to run . ,aun.U. ..I .- «U-M,.n.V «ll .nHcc 1 on 

his oenume humanity, all dcnv.n^ Imn. ih. I...'t Hm. -n „ (u-rv.n, an 

amalga- of body and soul, he has h- n nd.n.v -o nnprnge 

vlntarily on h's .urrouna,n,s. II. U, .,«. .■ N;? ; /; '^ 

form mdgments about whatever he h.un. ,h,.I m'.n, .ml, •'»•''"' ^^ 

lum' John maintains, catas.n.phe I ' " ' ';;■-- 

t onof hisownop.mon,ofh,.sown pn.pos,,! I .l..„«. ^ho uld be 

done of his own criteria of evaluation, nu.y wHl -mo.-m .' '^^Jf^- 

laTe'and unwarranted promotion of .he .- ih- .;M"-e ol that 

goal of "denying nature for the sake oi what i- above 

'as if thfs w'ere not more than enough .o eopc -^h M.erc -s fur^ 

ther problem with which the monk nu,s, sonu-how >'-'\' '' ^^ ^;;. 

inendins assault of demons, of evil spu-.ts hover.nn u.ul lu.k.ng ev 

rrTCher IrestLs and v.aous, ever on the waU;l. for ..n ..pportumty 

^turn a Lehever, but especially a monk, awav fnnn tlu- I-" ^h 

conduct. In this matter John is at one wUh h.s nun.e, ous p, de c. or 

and Hke them, he refers constantly to the war on ,wo l.on.s, agamst 

the self and against the hosts of marauding devils^ 

J We have countless hidden enemies-evil cnennt-s, ha.-sh de- 
ceitful wicked enemies with fire in their hands wishing to 
th; Lord's temple alight with the flame that is in U^ 
These enemies are powerful, unsleeping, incorporeal and 
unseen. (Step 1) 

And they cooperate, these enemies, this self and jhese circling de- 
they coop ' ^^j jh^ „„nU, calling h.m ai^d 

TtSng him '::':::;:: corner of the world where he is mo.st likely 

'^"'Jf these conditions he must therefore decde if his vocation is 
„.ore"ike!y to be realized in solitude than in a religious community 
Tan anchorite rather than a cenobite. The two options he before 
hm and he has numerous exem^TaH-to help htm make up his mind. 
As an rnchorite, Hving totally alone or with fellow anchorites nearby 
he can choose f;^ himself the ascetical regime that appears most suit- 
able to his needs. While he may seek guidance from many quarter 
and may feel bound to follow in detail the advice of someone else, the 
decisTon a to how he should conduct himself remains within his own 



person and under his own control. The cenobite, on the other hand, 
while renouncing the world as the anchorite does, also abdicates his 
capacity to decide his future for himself. To him, the "I," with its 
power of decision, is the enemy, always insidious, ever exploited by 
demons, endlessly a prey to deceit from within and from outside; and 
because of this, the solitary life appears too hazardous, too filled with 
risk. So he joins a community, a resolve in which he will be encour- 
aged by John, who is convinced of the fact that pnly a special few are 
able to live in solitude and that in community life the monk will find 
at least one major instrument for his own progress, namely, the strat- 
egy of obedience. 

It is no accident that one of the longest and most impressive sec- 
tions in The Ladder of Divine Ascent is given over to obedience, which is 
variously described, but which involves above all the decision "to put 
aside the capacity to make one's own judgment." With care and fore- 
.sight the monk, knowing his own special failings and proclivities, 
chooses a director or superior and then submits completely to him in 
everything great or small, reserving to himself not even the tiniest do- 
main of personal initiative. 

I have seen men there who lived in total obedience for all of 
fifty years, and when I begged them to tell me what consola- 
tion they had won from so great a labor, some answered that 
having arrived thereby at the lowest depths of abasement 
they could repel every onslaught, while others declared that 
they had attained complete freedom from the senses and had 
obtained serenity amid every calumny and insult. (Step 4) 

To emphasize this aspect of the matter, John puts forward sever- 
ill anecdotes of which the following is typical: 

I he superior . . . said to (Isidore): "Brother, this is what I 
want you to do. You are to stand at the gate of the monas- 
tery, and before everyone passing in or out, you are to bend 
the knee and say; 'Pray for me, Father, because I am an epi- 
leptic.' " And Isidore obeyed (and) spent seven years at the 
gale. ... 1 asked this great Isidore how he had occupied his 
mind while he was at the gate. . . , "At first I judged thai I 
ha<t been sold into slavery for my sins," he said "So I did 
penance with iiitterness, great effort ami l)lootl. Alter tt yrrt!' 



xxiv 



XXV 



PRl'.FACI 



mv heart was no longer full of grief, :n.a I lu^aii loilunkot 
a reward for my obedience from CJod 1 li.nscM. At.mluT yc^ir 
passed and in the depths of my heart I bcyan lo sec how un- 
worthy I was to live in a monastery, to enconnicr the fa- 
thers to share in the Divine Mysteries. I lost the courage to 
look anyone in the face, but lowering my eyes ami lowering 
my thoughts even further, I asked with true si.uerity tor the 
prayers of those going in and out." (Step 4) 

From this, and from the many other incidents and comments set 
down by John, it becomes clear that the requirement of obedience im- 
plies very much more than what the term would suggest today, h is 
not a question of agreeing to accept the rules of a club that one has 
voluntarily joined. Nor is the obedience invoked here the phenom- 
enon one associates with a soldier, who, in following highly danger- 
ous and even very stupid orders, can still preserve an independence of 
view concerning them. The submission of the monk goes much far- 
ther and includes the surrender of even the capacity to hold a P"vate 
and unspoken attitude of critical reserve or judgment regarding the 
commands meted out to him. And this is not to be confused with 
blind obedience. For the obedience is indeed purposeful, because the 
monk in h.s awareness within himself of particular failings actual or 
potential, has chosen a superior who will correct these; and h,s total 
unquestioning submission will then be the avenue by which to tran- 
scend weakness and to advance toward increasingly important spin- 
tual goals: 

Ihe surest sign of our faith is when we obey our superiors 
without hesitation, even when we see the opposite happen- 
ing to what we had hoped. (Step 4) 

Let what we call quicksilver be a paradigm of perfect obedi- 
ence Roll it with any substance you wish and it will never- 
theless run to the lowest place and mix with nothing defiled. 
(Ibid.) 

When a monk living in solitude has realized what his weak 
point is, and when he changes place and sells himself to obe- 
dience, then, blind that he was once, he recovers sight and 
can see Christ without difficulty. (Ibid.) 



xxvi 



PREFACE 



He who strives for dispassion and for God considers lost any 
day on which he was not criticized. Like trees swayed by the 
wind and driving their roots deeper into the ground, those 
who live in obedience become strong and unshakable souls. 
(Ibid.) 

All this because the self, reduced through obedience not only to a 
humble recognition of its own insignificance, but also to an actualiza- 
tion of that insignificance, will then lie open to receive the grace of 
becoming someone pleasing in the sight of God, pleasing as a show- 
place of the virtues. 

These virtues, and the vices that shadow them, form the subject 
matter of the greater part of The Ladder of Divine Ascent. They are sub- 
mitted to penetrating analysis, classification, and subdivision. They 
are treated in a sequence more or less logical and in a manner occa- 
sionally reminiscent of a soul owner's manual. Yet this too can be 
misleading, as indeed the image of the ladder itself is somewhat mis- 
leading. For it would be wrong to think in terms of a solid progres- 
sion up from one firm level to that above it. A more appropriate 
metaphor would be the text of a play or the notations of a musical 
composition whose internal patterns and consistencies may well be 
described and established, but which really come to true being only 
in a living enactment. In The Ladder of Divine Ascent the monk can 
study the virtues as an actor studies his lines, but the exercise is only 
of secondary interest if it is not followed by the actual performance, a 
performance that, in the case of the monk, will be in an ambience of 
prayer, in a continuous "dialog and union of man and God" (Step 28). 

Here, perhaps, is the crucial point. For John Climacus is con- 
cerned not so much with the outward trappings of monasticism as 
with its vital content. To him the monk is a believer who has under- 
taken to enter prayerfully into unceasing communion with God, and 
this in the form of a commitment not only to turn from the self and 
world but to bring into being in the context of his own person as 
many of the virtues as possible. He does not act in conformity with 
virtues of one kind or another. Somehow, from within the boundaries 
of his own presence, he emerges to he humility, to be gentleness, to be 
Ktn abhorred, to be faith and hope and, above all else, to be love. Such 
il vocation turns him intr) a marked man, not just in the sort of milieu 
known lo Jolm Climacus, luii at any time, even where tlir (iiiinr of 
(iod is something to be shrugged off or rejected. He offers mi px«ni 



xxvti 



PREFACE 



ple of love and courage, something to be followed l>y '^^^^^.^t 
Zn way and as their own .nsights and crcumsta.Kos dutatc, 

cause 

the monastic Hfe ,s a hght for all men. Hence monks should 
snare no effort to become a shining example >n all th.ngs, 
and hey should give no scandal .n anything they say or da 
For >f the light becomes dark, then all the deeper w.ll be the 
darkness of those living in the world. (Step 26) 

c; h in outline is the perspective in which The Ladder of Divine 

™ "J LT^tpoverished .,sio„ ,„d a d™ini*ed 8-P "Jj, :,-"; 

ihc nianv opportunities to contront a view o 5 ^^ reasoned 

. ;nhclVui(ufsuch a confrontation IS a researched No, or a reasone 
IcMuic'^encc. then indeed the sum of human enrichment can confi- 
dently be held to have been augmented. 



INTRODUCTION 



I 



I. THE AUTHOR AND HIS BACKGROUND 



Sinai and Tabor , 

With the exception of the Bible and the service books, there is no 
work in Eastern Christendom that has been studied, copied and trans- 
lated more often than The Ladder of Divine Ascent by St. John Clima- 
cus. Every Lent in Orthodox monasteries it is appointed to be read 
uloud in church or in the refectory, so that some monks will have lis- 
tened to it as much as fifty or sixty times in the course of their life. 
Outside the monasteries it has also been the favorite reading of count- 
less lay people in Greece, Bulgaria, Serbia, Russia, and throughout 
the Orthodox world. The popularity of The Ladder in the East equals 
I hat of 'The Imitation of Christ in the West, although the two books are 
iiliogether different in character. 

The author of The ladder lived in the desert of Sinai, at the foot of 
Jebcl Musa, Moses' Mount, that rises rocky and precipitous to a 
height of nearly 7,500 feet. The surroundings would often have called 
to his mind the scene in Exodus: the lightning and thunder, the 
fnountain shrouded in thick cloud, and Moses climbing up alone into 
llu- ilarkne.ss to speak with (Jod face to face (Exod. 20:18-21). But St. 
J(»hn t^limacus was also reminded constantly of another mountain- 
dtp, belonging to the New (Covenant — 'labor, "the higli mountain 
«|n<rl" (Mall. I7:t), where our Lord was Iransfigured before ilie itiiee 
dlNciplcs. Kor, when he prayed in the church built for ihe monks mI 
SIniii bv ihe I'mfx-ror Jiistininn in 5.^6-7, each lime lie Inuked up |iilm 



XXVlll 



INTRODUCTION 



INTRODUCTION 



would have seen in the apse at the east end the yica. n„.^aK■ .hat .tdl 
survives to this day, depicting Christ's Transf.gur.non. 

Visually and spiritually, then, John's imagmat.on was dominated 
by these two mountains. Sinai and Tabor, and both a ,kc arc reflected 
in the book that he wrote. In its seventy, its refusal ot con,prumise 
and Its demand for total dedication, The Ladder calls to m.nd the arid 
desert, and the rocks and darkness of Sinai. But those prepar d to 
look deeper will discover that the book speaks not only of penitence 
but of icy, not only of self-denial but of man's -"y.--/:7g^^f2'. 
Together with the gloom of Sinai there is also the fire of the Burning 
Bush and the light of Tabor. 

The Three Monastic Paths u rf„ ,.f St 

Little is known, beyond the bare outlines, about the life of bt^ 
lohn Climacus.2 In Greek he is called loannis tts Khmakos, John of the 
Ladder " after the book that he wrote. In Latin this came to be ren- 
dered /«««.. CUmacus, and so in English his t.tle has become Chma- 
cu • In Greek he is also named "John the Scholastic" (scholasttkosy, 
while the term used here could mean a lawyer, it is often more broad- 
Ty applied to someone well educated or widely read, and this seems to 

he the sense in John's case. 

John's dates have been much debated. According to the view 
most commonly accepted, he was born m ^V^^^.^'f before 579^ and 
he died around 649- but some scholars put his bjrth as early as 25 
and his death around 600,* while others place his death as late as 670 



rT[,c mosa.c date, probably from 565-6, nine years after the bu.lding of the 

church, ic V. Benesevic, -'Sur l/d.te de U n.as.Y<,ue de la Tran.ftgurafon au Moti. 

Sinai"', Wvztfn/iwn i (1^24), pp. 145-72. co/uAOR- 

2 The main source .. the Life by Daniel of Ra.thu: Greek tex, m PC «H, 596-608 

VT 11 M pp xv.iv-xx.viii. l>.n,el wr.tes as if he were John's contemporary but he 

. „; ' V ' w 11 informed. For further deta.ls about John's Ufe, -;''-^-™.-'" J"'^^" 

, fi:„.; ss <; 7 12 14 W- ed F Nau, Onenj 6*m/ifln«i n (1902), pp, 

^J;7c^':^:^:Z m5 ^p: lix-xl.There .s some doubt how much of this 

schrrfi ''^^'^O^g'; PP;/;;^^,„,,,,,,,„ ,,„,,,„„ a-he-alomca 1%4), p. 18«- An early date is 
also prefe;red by B^nesevic, an. a>.. By.annor. i (1924). pp. 168-9: .„ hts v.ew f.hmacus 
was born before 532 and died before 596. 



80.5 While certainty is not possible, it seems reasonable to regard 
John as an author of the seventh rather than the sixth century, as a 
contemporary, that is to say, of St. Maximus the Confessor (c. 580- 
662). It is not known where he was born. His delight in metaphors 
drawn from the sea has led some to conclude that his early years were 
spent near the coast,*^ but this is no more than a speculation. 

John was sixteen when he came to Sinai.'' Here he would have 
found a monastic center already well established, containing in close 
proximity all the three forms of the monastic life that he describes in 
Step 1 of The Ladder.^ First, inside the fortress walls built at the orders 
of Justinian, and occupying the buildings around the church with its 
mosaic of the Transfiguration, there was a fully organized cembium, a 
monastic brotherhood pursuing the common life under the direction 
of an abbot (higoumenos). Second, scattered through the surrounding 
desert there were hermits dedicated to the solitary life. And in the 
third place there were monks following the middle way, intermediate 
between the cenobitic and the anachoretic forms, whereby small 
groups lived as close-knit families, each under the immediate guid- 
ance of a spiritual father. For this third way, "the life of stillness 
shared with one or two others," as he terms it, John himself expresses 
a preference: it avoids the dangers of excessive isolation, while being 
at the same time less "structured" and more personal than life in a 
large-scale monastery, and providing more opportunities for silence. 

In the course of his life St. John Climacus had experience of all 
these three forms. Initially, so it seems, he adopted the middle way, 
taking as his spiritual father a certain Abba Martyrius. After three 
years, when John was nineteen or twenty, Martyrius took him to the 



5. H.-G. Beck, Kirche und Tbeologische Literatur im Byzuntinischen Rekh (Munich 
I'J.W), p. 451. 

ft. S. Rabois-Bousquet, "Saint Jean Climaque: sa vie et son oeuvre", Echos d'Orient 
*xi\ (192.1), pp. 442-3. 

7. Daniel of Raithu, Life (.f97A). But L. Petit, DTC viii {1924), cols. 690-3, doubts 
whether t;iimacus entered the monastic life so young, and prefers to identify him with 
ri ccrlain John the Rhetorician, a married man in Alexandria, who is mentioned by 
Sophroniu-s, Miriiths ofSl. Cynis and St. John. §§ 61, 70 (PC 87, 364(lA, 3673 A); in Peril's 
Vtrw, ClirnacuN is also the John rtlenlioned in Moschus, The Spiniual Akiidois, (j MI2 (If, 
K7, 29C,(>D), Hill ihis ihcory thai Gliniaiu.s only became a monk ai a mature a^v. after 
UlKmiine and a m-cuIiii- career, remains lupo! helical and has mn been vMdi-lv luci'pteil 

H. I (MIDI, p, -'). 



INTRODUCTION 



INTRODUCTION 



chapel at the top of Moses' Mount and there, following the custom of 
theCe he tonsured John as a monk. Commg down from the sum- 
tVZr^o met AnasLius, the abbot of the central monastery who 
^ad not seen John before. "Where does th.s boy come from asked 
Anastasms, "and who professed him- Martyr.us -^'^^^'^^h- J^^//^ 
done so "How strange!" Anastas.us exclaimed. Who would have 
?h.:;:ght that you had professed the abbot of Mount «- " Martynu 
and John Climacus continued on the.r way, and paid a visit to the 
celebrated solitary John the Sabbaite, who washed John Chmacus 
fet and ki sed his hand, but took no notice of Martynus. John the 
Sabbat's disciple was scandalized by this, but after the two v.si ors 
had leftthe old man assured him: "Believe me, I ^on^^^^^^l^VX 
boy is; but I received the abbot of Sinai and washed his feet. Forty 
vears later these prophecies were fulfilled. ,0 t k„ 

' Martyrius, so it seems, died soon after John's profession.- John 
now retired irito solitude, settling as a hermit at Tholas, some five 
miles from the fortress housing the main monastery. Yet he was not 
:^ gelher isolated, for there were certainly other --ks in the imme 
diate vicinity According to John's biographer Darnel of Ra.thu dur 
fng hiryea'Iof retreat ft Tholas he received the gift of tears and the 
arace of continual prayer, He reduced sleep to a minimum but dis- 
p a ed a prudent moderation in his fasting, for it was h.s custom to 
e 'everything allowed by the monastic rule, but in extremely sina 
quantities. In' time he became known and respected as a spin ua^ 
?T,„de and he began to receive frequent visits from his fellow 
monks-so frequem, indeed, that some criticized him for being a gos- 
" and a hatterbo;. Thereupon John kept total silence for a year 
onlv agreeing to speak once more wnh his visitors when entreated to 
do so bv the very monks who had been his critics. 

AtLme pofnt during his time in Tholas I^^n made a ,ourney o 
F^rvDt stavine at a large monastery on the outskirts of Alexandr a, 
{^fha' he w itne ed in'this community of several hundred monks 
Id a laslg impression on him, as can be gauged from the lengthy 
desc iption that he gives in Steps 4 and 5 of The Ladder. Since his own 



early years as a monk had been spent in the third way, in a small her- 
mitage and not in a large cenobium, it is easy to understand the impact 
which life at the Alexandrian house must have had upon him. He was 
struck in particular by the abbot's power of insight, and by the com- 
bination of sternness and affection which he showed in his treatment 
of the monks. John was also impressed by the "Prison," a mile from 
the main monastery, in which erring monks were confined; here he 
stayed for a month. ^^ His vivid account of the physical austerities and 
the mental anguish undergone by the monks in this "Prison" is likely 
to prove, for most Western readers, by far the least attractive section 
of The Ladder; at times, so one modern critic has complained, it sounds 
like "a badly run psychiatric institution." But John was impressed by 
other things as well during his visit to the Alexandrian monastery — 
by the unity prevailing among the brethren, by the warmth and sen- 
sitivity of their mutual love, and by their unceasing inward prayer. '^ 

\ After forty years of hermit life at Tholas, against his will John 
was elected abbot of the central monastery at Sinai. On the day of his 
installation as abbot, a party of six hundred pilgrims chanced to ar- 
rive at the monastery. While they were all being given a meal, John 
saw "a man with short hair, dressed like a Jew in a white tunic, going 
round with an air of authority and giving orders to the cooks, cel- 
larers, stewards and other servants." Once the meal had finished, the 
man was nowhere to be found. "It was our lord Moses," said John, 
"I le has done nothing strange in serving here in the place that is his 
own."'* I'o the monks the sign was significant; for they were soon to 
iw\ that, in the person of their new abbot John, they had indeed 
found another Moses. ^^ 

I How long John continued in office is unknown. It was during 
this last period of his life, while abbot, that he composed The Ladder of 
fhviiic Ascent, at the request of another John, the superior of a nearby 
monastery at Raithu.'** "Tell us in our ignorance," asked John of 
Uiiillui, "what like Moses of old you have seen in divine vision upon 
llic mountain; write it down in a book and send it to us as if it were 



died no. whrrl John w.s n.netfen years of age, but when John had been nineteen years 
in the monastic life (i.e. when he was about thirry-five). 
11. Daniel, /.//> (600A-601 A, 604D-60SA). 



12. S (776H), |). MX. 
It ^C^.KIAHC), |)p. y5-W. 
14, Atiiisiiisiiis, Siirraltva, % 7. 
IV DiinicI, /,i/f |6(I5H). 

Ift I'rolmlily tii \k iiii'iiiificil with Tor, <jii ilic {iiiiC ul Sue/ iicjr tin- sniitlicrti tl)) 
III I III' .SiDui |iriiiii'iiihi 



INTRODUCTION 

the tables of the Law, wntten by God." In his reply John Cl.macus 
nrotest that the task is beyond his strength: "I am st.ll among the 
Larn s 'But, he says, constrained by the virtue of obedience, he ha 
corphed wtth the request, composing "tn my stammering way what 
is no more than "an outline sketch."''' 

Shortly before his death John, longing to en,oy once more the 

stillness in'which he had lived as a solitary resigned his position as 

abbot appointing his brother George to replace him. 

There IS nothing to indicate that St. John Climacus was ev^er or- 

dainJd a prL" His anointment as abbot is not in itself proof that he 

was in holy orders. 

II. THE LADDER: PURPOSE AND STRUCTURE 

^^'" VttX was written, then, by one who. after living for most of 
his monastic life as a hermit, had in old age been entrusted with the 
p stTraTcare of a large community, it is the work of a solitary w^.nng 
for cenobites The audience that John has in view is mona tic He be- 
gins hifbru, however, with a clear affirmation of God|s oving care 
for the entirety of humankind. Salvation is offered to all alike. 

God is the life of all free beings. He is the salvation of believ- 
ers or unbelievers, of the just or the unjust . of monks or 
those living in the world, of the educated or the 'U^terate o 
the healthy or the sick, of the young or the very old. He is 
like the outpouring of light, the glimpse of the sun, or the 
changes of the weather, which are the same for everyone 
without exception. "For God is no respecter of persons 
(Rom. 2:11).'^ 

To the married Christian John insists that matrimony is not an 
obstacle to salvation: 



^or John of Ra.thu's letter and John Clim.cus- reply, see PC 88, 624-8; ET, 

"'^^^^aSs^ L, N.rr....s, m. mentioning John the Sabba.te, hut pr<,ba.>K- refer- 
ring to John Climacus (cf, PC 88, 60yA). 
18. 1 (633A), p. 74. 



INTRODUCTION 



Do whatever good you may. Speak evil of no one. Rob no 
one. Tell no lie. Despise no one. . . . Show compassion to the 
needy. ... Be satisfied with what your own wives can pro- 
vide you. If you do all this, you will not be far from the king- 
dom of heaven." 

Later in the work, he points out that purity is by no means the mo- 
nopoly of those who have never married, and he cites as proof the ex- 
ample of the apostle Peter, "who had a mother-in-law and who 
nevertheless received the keys of the kingdom. "^° 

But, having insisted in this manner upon the universality of 
God's saving love, John makes it clear that he himself is writing spe- 
cifically for monks. This needs to be remembered by the modern 
reader. Yet does it therefore follow that The Ladder is of no interest to 
those in the "world"? Surely not. It has in fact been read with the ut- 
most profit by many thousands of married Christians; and, whatever 
the author's original intention, there is nothing surprising in that. 
Monasticism, as St. Basil the Great observes, is nothing else than "life 
according to the Gospel."^' Whether monastic or married, all the 
baptized are responding to the same Gospel call; the outward condi- 
tions of their response may vary, but the path is essentially one. 

The Need for Personal Experience 

St. John Climacus, like St. Symeon the New Theologian and St. 
Gregory Palamas at a later date,^^ lays heavy emphasis upon the need 
for personal experience. Christianity, as he sees it, is much more than 
the exterior acceptance of doctrines and rules. No one can be a true 
Christian at second hand; there must be a personal encounter, in 
which each knows, sees, tastes and touches for himself. 

This applies first of all to anyone who teaches others: 

The true teacher is one who has received directly from heav- 
en the tablet of spiritual knowledge, inscribed by God's own 
finger, that is, by the active working of illumination. Such a 



IV. I (MOD), p. 78. 
2IK 1.5 (KWA), |i, 181. 

21, LftH-rim, 1 {PC il. 7filH). 

22. Cf. K. Ware, " rriKiiiion anci I'ersonjj l''.»i]KTieiu-e in l.^iicr H\'/jtilinc I hriil- 
(>({y", l-Mtteni C.hunha Review iii (IV70), pp. Ml 41. 



INTRODUCTION 

man has no need of other books. It is not right for teachers to 
g.ve instruction by copying out what other people say. ■ 

And just as the true teacher is the man of personal experience who 
has seen for h.mself, so likewise the teacher's aim m g.vmg .nstruc- 
'onTs to brmg his disciples to the point of cris.s and confrontation, 
where they too wUl see for themselves. John, as we shall see, attache 
profound importance to the role of the spiritual father, aff.rmmg tf. 
none should embark upon the mward journey without a guide. 1 he 
I^pTr^tual father, however, .s not in his view a -^^stuute figure but n 
initiator. H,s function is not to experience things on our behalf, 
hereby dispensing us from the need to experience the- personally^ 
but the precise opposite. He is the very one who says to us. Open 
your own eyes, look and see for yourselves. To see, so ohn ins.sts, it 
is not sufficLt to hsten to directions from other people; you need to 
use your own natural power of sight. "In the same way, you cann 
discover from the teaching of others the beauty of prayer. He takes 

as an example the taste of honey: 

Do you imagine that plain words can . . . describe the love of 
God and assurance of the heart? Do you imagine that talk 
of such matters will mean anything to someone who has nev^ 
er experienced them? If you think so, then you will be hke a 
man who with words and examples tries to convey the 
sweetness of honey to people who have never tasted it. He 
talks uselessly.25 

This firm belief in the necessity for personal experience has de- 
termined the character which John gives to his book^ Convinced as he 
oTthe need for encounter and participation, for direct tasting and 
ouching, John's aim in The Ladder is not to inculcate abstract each- 
ng or to Impose a formal code of ascetic rules, but to evoke in h 
refders an experience similar to his own. As the late F-„^^^ S^^ 
Florovsky put it, -The Ladder is an invitation to pilgrimage It is an 
IZLZ\ Lrk, and only those who read it existentially will appreci- 
ate its true value. 



23. Past. 1 (U65C), p. 231. 

24. 28(1 HOC), p. 281. 

25. 25 (y88AB), p. 218. 



INTRODUCTION 



Faithful to this existential stance, in The Ladder John usually re- 
frains from giving detailed directions about what foods to eat, how 
much and when, about hours of sleep and the daily program of man- 
ual labor. We search in vain through the pages of The Ladder for that 
kind of guidance. When discussing prayer, he likewise gives no de- 
scription of the liturgical offices, no advice about preparation for 
Holy Communion and its frequency, no specific instructions about 
methods of private prayer, about formulae, bodily posture, breathing 
exercises and the like. These omissions are surely deliberate. His in- 
terest is in the inward rather than the outward. What matters for him 
is not physical asceticism but humility and purity of heart: 

In Scripture are the words, "I humbled myself, and the Lord 
hastened to rescue me" {Ps. 1 14:6); and these words are there 
instead of "I have fasted," "I have kept vigil," "I lay down on 
the bare earth. "^^ 

What he offers is not techniques and formulae but a way of life, not 
regulations but a path of initiation. 

Because his aim is to impart a living, personal experience, John is 
often intentionally enigmatic. Like our Lord with His parables, like 
the Zen masters with their koans or the Sufis with their "scatter" 
technique, John avoids spelling out his conclusions too plainly, for he 
wants the reader to work out the answer for himself. When the point 
of his examples is left unclear, or he seems to jump in arbitrary fash- 
ion from one idea to another, normally this is due, not to carelessness 
or incompetence, but to deliberate purpose. He takes a conscious 
pleasure in cryptic phrases: 

If all are not saved who have been baptized, I will pass in si- 
lence over what follows. 

In the entire universe there is a unique place that saw the 
sun just once. 

Let us summon the Holy Trinity to help us as we marshal 
three against three. 



2rt. 25 (W2D), )). 221. 



INTRODUCTION 



Why is it that there were not as many lights among the holy 
fathers at Tabennisi as at Scetis? Cope with that question if 
you can. 1 cannot say why. Or rather, 1 do not wish to. 

In posing such riddles, John's aim is pastoral: to elicit a response, to 
provoke the reader into a leap of faith, to bring him to the moment of 
personal encounter. 

Style and Structure: The Thirty Steps 

With this obiective in view, St. John Climacus has adopted a dis- 
tinctive literary style in The Ladder. At first sight the Greek may seem 
abrupt and rough, but the book is in fact coinposed with subtlety and 
conscious art, in a rhythmic prose often not far removed from poetry. 
The abruptness is intended. The author loves short, sharp sentences, 
pithy definitions, paradoxical aphorisms, for his purpose is to wake 
the reader up. He excels in quaint illustrations, marked by a monastic 
sense of humor that has amused his audience over the centuries: 

. . . like someone trying at the same time to swim and to clap 
his hands. , . . 

. . . like someone who pelts [a] dog with bread. . . . 

Do not imitate those who in burying the dead first lament 
them— and then go off and get drunk. 

A man who has heard himself sentenced to death will not 
worry about the way theaters are run. 

The thought of the hesychast keeps hold of his spiritual 

28 

We a'^eTeft with the impression that, behind the unusual style and 
picturesque images, here is an author with a strongly "^^'•^^^J person- 
ality exacting, with a sharp eye for the weaknesses of his fellow 
monks, yet also full of humor and unexpected compassion, realistic- 
but with the realism that springs from living prayer 

John's basic image, around which the entire book is structured, is 

^77(6360 O 76- 2S IWA), p. 221; 26 (1021 A), p. 234; 27 (1105C), p. 265. 
2«: 6 (SS p. U3r7 U4D-Ha^A. 8UD). pp. m, 143-4; 27 (1097C), p. 2.2, 



10 



INTRODUCTION 



of a ladder stretching from earth to heaven like that which Jacob saw 
(Gen. 28:12). Earlier writers, such as St. Gregory of Nazianzus^'' and 
St. John Chrysostom'o in the fourth century, and Theodoret of Cyrr- 
hus^^ in the fifth, had already spoken of the spiritual life as a ladder, 
up which by God's grace we mount step by step. But in St. John Cli- 
macus the analogy is far more developed. His ladder has thirty rungs 
or steps, one for each year in the hidden life of Christ before His bap- 
tism.^^ John's ingenious use of the ladder-image at once catches the 
reader's attention, giving to his book as a whole a distinctive flavor 
and unity. Indeed, his symbolic ladder soon became part of the spiri- 
tual imagination of the Christian East, and is frequently represented 
in panel ikons, refectory frescoes and illuminated manuscripts.^^ 
John is usually shown standing to one side, near the foot, holding a 
scroll and pointing to the ladder. The monks are struggling laborious- 
ly upward, while at the top Christ reaches out His arms to welcome 
those who have completed the ascent. On the right of the ladder an- 
gels encourage the monks as they climb, on the left demons try to trip 
them up and pull them off, and at the bottom the dragon of the abyss 
waits with open jaws. 

As a supplement to the thirty steps of The Ladder, John also wrote 
a short treatise entitled To the Shepherd, describing the task of the ab- 
bot or spiritual father. Sometimes reckoned as the thirty-first step, 
this is likewise addressed to John of Raithu.^* 

While The Ladder of Divine Ascent is not in the strict sense a sys- 
tematic treatise — John modestly calls himself a "second-rate archi- 
tect"35 — it is evident that he has arranged his rungs with care, 
according to a precise scheme, John embraces in his scope the whole 
extent of the spiritual life, starting with the initial "turning" or con- 



29. Oration 43, 71 {PC i6, 529D). 

30. Homilies on John 83, 5 (PG 59, 454). 

31. History of the Monks in Syria 27 {PC 82, 1484C), The image of a "soul ladder" is 
widespread in the ancient world: see A. B. Cook, Zeus. A Study in Ancient Religion, vol. ii 
(Cambridge 1925), pp, 114-40; E. Bertaud and A. Rayez, 'Echelle spirituelle', DS iv 
(I95H), cols. 62-H6. 

32. Briif Summary (1 161A), p. 291. 

i- 33. See J. R. Martin, The Illustration of the Heavenly Ladder of John Climacus (Prince- 

ton 1V54); M, Hcppell, introduction to St, John Climacus, The Ladder of Difiue ■tscnii, 
F.'r Archimandrite l.azarus (London 1959), pp. 29-31 

34, (ireek text, I'd KH, 1 165-1208; ET, HTM, pp, 231-511; not int-luded in ili<- |.rM- 
rnt volume, 

15, 27 (II05H), p, 265, 



It 



INTRODUCTION 



version, continuing with a detailed analysis of the virtues and vices, 
and ending with the mystical union. The work falls into three main 
sections, of unequal extent. In the first three steps John describes the 
break with the "world," the renunciation both outward and inward 
that forms the presupposition of any spiritual ascent. 1 hen, in a far 
longer section (Steps 4-26), he discusses the "active hfe or practice 
of the virtues" {praxis, praktiki), along with the corresponding pas- 
sions that must be uprooted. Finally, the last four steps are devoted to 
the "contemplative life" {theoria), to stillness, prayer and union with 

"^ As this summary implies, John accepts in general terms the dis- 
tinction drawn by Evagrius of Pontus (c. 345-99) between the active 
and the contemplative life. But, as Dr. Christos Yannaras rightly ob- 
serves ^e John does not follow the Evagrian scheme with any great ex- 
actness. In contrast to Evagrius, he holds that the supreme end of the 
spiritual way is not contemplation or gnosis but love. Much in the ear- 
lier steps of The Ladder relates to the contemplative as well as to the 
active life, while the final step on love is concerned with both the ac- 
tive and the contemplative life at once; in the context of divine love 
there can be no sharp differentiation between the two. 

The basic pattern of the thirty steps of The Ladder can be present- 
ed thus:'' 



I. The Break with the World 

\. Renunciation 

2. Detachment 

3. Exile 

II. The Practice of the Virtues ^ Active Life") 

(i) Fundamental Virtues 

4. Obedience 

5. Penitence 

6. Remembrance of Death 

7. Sorrow 



-i6. lmttapbysikitoumvuitos(Kthtns\91\),i>x>.S%-(i2. 

37. This scheme is taken, with some modifications, from G. Couilleau, Ui 
(1972), col. 373. I am in general much indebted to this article. 



12 



INTRODUCTION 



(ii) The Struggle Against the Passions 

(a) Passions That Are Predominantly Non-physical 

8. Anger 

9. Malice 

10. Slander 

11. Talkativeness 

12. Falsehood 

13. Despondency 

(b) Physical and Material Passions 

14. Gluttony 

15. Lust 
16-17. Avarice 

(c) Non-Physical Passions (cont.) 
18-20, Insensitivity 

21. Fear 

22. Vainglory 

23. Pride (also Blasphemy) ^ 

(iii) Higher Virtues of the "Active Life" 

24. Simplicity 

25. Humility 

26. Discernment 

III. Union tmth God (Transition to the "Contemplative Life") 

27. Stillness 

28. Prayer 

29. Dispassion 

30. Love 

While the book as a whole has in this way a clearly defined struc- 
ture, many of the individual steps have also an internal structure of 
their own. Thus most of the chapters on the vices are arranged on the 
following pattern: 

Brief introductory statement, indicating the source of the vice 
•nd its place in the sequence of The Ladder; 
^» Short definitions; 

More detailed analysis: causes, symptoms, effects, remedies (with 
illustraiive anecdotes); 
B Final summary. 



\\ 



INTRODUCTION 



Glancing through the outline given above, a reader may gain the 
impression that John's approach is for the most part negative. For, 
omTf th?r"y chapters, six^en are concerned w.th the vices to be over 
come and only fourteen with the virtues to be acquired; and several 
of these fourteen chapters seem also to be mainly negative concerned 
as they are with such themes as "penitence," "sorrow, d.spassion_ 
But th.s initial impress.on is misleading. First, the chapters on the 
vices are usually shorter than those on the virtues; so the fourteen 
Lps on the virtLs, added together, are considerably more than tw.ce 
as Lg as the sixteen steps on the vices. Second, the chapters on the 
V ces fpeak also of the corresponding virtues: Step , for instance 
deals w'th meekness as well as anger, Step 11 -'^^ silence as well as 
talkativeness, Step 15 with purity as well as lust, Steps 1«- -^^ 
vigilance as well as insensitivity. Third and most fundamentally, as 
we shall see shortly, penitence, sorrow and dispassion are far from be- 
ing predominantly negative. 

Withm this general scheme that we have indicated, there are 
skillfully balanced correspondences and contrasts: 

I (\-i) balances HI (27-30). 

II i (4-7) balances II iii (24-26). 

11 ii b (14-17), on passions of a material type, '^^ ^1;'"'^^^^ by two 
balancing sections, each of six steps-II ii a (8-13) and II n c (18-23)- 
on passions of a less physical character. 

Closer examination reveals more detailed structures of type 
and "antitype." A theme is adumbrated in the earlier P^^^ of /he 
work, and then taken up again at a higher level m the second part. 



Step 2 (detachment) 
Step 4 (obedience) 
Step 5 (penitence) 
Step 1 3 (despondency) 



Step 29 (dispassion) 
Step 26 (discernment)" 
Step 25 (humility) 
Step 18 (insensitivity) 



Underlying these various parallels and oppositions there is, in 
ne Ladder Is a whole, a basic progression from human effort to d.v.e 
gift, from kopo. to chansma. Certainly, God's grace ,s absolutely mdis 
pensable for the attainment of any virtue, however humble. Yet. 

^-he con.ect.on i. m.de clear in the definUion of obedience ^^^^^J^^^ 

bor.ten«.. to pu, ...de the c.pacuy ,o make one's own .udgment o. ^ore t.r.ll> . 
'-.n abandonment of discernment in a wealth of discernment ; 4 (68tlA), p. K. 



14 



INTRODUCTION 



while both the divine and the human elements are present through- 
out the ascent of the ladder, on the earlier rungs we are chiefly con- 
scious of our own toil and struggle, while on the higher rungs we are 
more and more aware of the freely granted grace of God. What begins 
as painful warfare ends as spontaneous joy: 

At the beginning of our religious life, we cultivate the vir- 
tues, and we do so with toil and difficulty. Progressing a lit- 
tle, we then lose our sense of grief or retain very little of it. 
But when our mortal intelligence turns to zeal and is mas- 
tered by it. then we work with full joy, determination, de- 
sire, and a holy flame. ^^ 

Two further things are apparent in the structure of The Ladder. 
First, by far the larger part of the work is concerned with the practice 
of the virtues and the struggle against the vices; by comparison, the 
section on the contemplative life (Steps 27-30) is relatively brief — to 
many, no doubt, disappointingly so. But Jfthn has good reasons for 
concentrating in this way on the active life. He does not want his 
readers willfully and prematurely to seek after visions and ecstasies, 
instead of learning penitence and humility. The Ladder displays in this 
regard a marked sobriety. John is highly cautious about dreams;*'^ and 
it is significant that much the longest chapters in the book are those 
on obedience (Step 4) and on discernment or discretion {diakrisis; Step 
26). 

John is constantly warning us not to attempt too much too soon; 
we cannot "climb the entire ladder in a single stride."*' When, in the 
monastery at Alexandria. John tried to start a discussion about still- 
ness or inner silence (hesychia), he was kindly but firmly rebuked by 
his hosts: 



Father John [they said], we are corporeal beings and we lead 
a corporeal life. Knowing this, we choose to wage war ac- 
cording to the measure of our weakness. ^^ 



.ly, I (Atyc), p, 77. 

4(1, i (f.fi';U-/,72H), pp, K';.-w), 

41. 14 (Hrt^m, p, 161'., ff. 25 (<W7D), p. 22.";, 

42. 4(7(101)), p. 1(11. 



15 



INTRODUCTION 



John took the point. In The Ladder he insists that hesychta-xn^^mng 
both the solitary hfe and the more advanced forms of mner prayer- 
is only for "very few,"« only for those who have been prepared 
through long years of training in the practice of the virtues. No one 
should embark on "theology," in the sense of the contemplative lite, 
without first struggling against the passions: "It is risky to sw,m .n 
one's clothes. A slave of passion should not dabble in theology. 
That is why John speaks at length about the warfare against sin, but 
offers no more than a few veiled hints about the final transfiguration 
of the human person, in soul and body, by the uncreated light. His 
reticence is deliberate. He does not want us to reach out for the iced 
cakes before we have eaten the bread and butter. 

Secondly, John did not mean the image of the ladder which 
dominates the book, to be interpreted too literally. While placed in 
ordered sequence, the different steps are not to be regarded as strictly 
consecutive stages, the one terminating before the next commences. 
For even though by God's grace we gradually progress to the higher 
steps we still continue to live and develop simultaneously on the low- 
er levels as well. This is true in particular of the fifth step, penitence, 
and of the seventh step, sorrow or mourning {pentbos). These are 
things that in this present life we never outgrow; they continue un- 
ceasing up to the gates of death. As John insists; 

When we die, we will not be criticized for having failed to 
work miracles. We will not be accused of having failed to be 
theologians or contemplatives. But we will certainly have 
some explanation to offer to God for not having mourned 
unceasingly.*^ 

In our beginning is our end. In one sense, the supreme aim of the 
spiritual path is indeed "theology," the contemplation or vision of 
God. But in another and perhaps more vital sense, our end-pomt is 
our starting-point: penitence. 



43. 
44. 
45. 



4(725C), p. 119. 
27 {1097C), p. 262. 
7(816D). p. 145. 



16 



INTRODUCTION 



III. THE SPIRITUAL TEACHING OF ST. JOHN CLIMACUS 

Imitation of Christ, Spirituality and Dogma, Grace and Free Will 

Without attempting a full analysis, let us consider a few master 

themes in the spiritual teaching of The Ladder. 

In the first step, at the very beginning of the work, St. John Cli- 

macus briefly indicates the essence of the spiritual life: 

A Christian is an imitator of Christ in thought, word and 
deed, as far as this is humanly possible, and he believes right- 
ly and blamelessly in the Holy Trinity.'**' 

In the final step he returns to the same idea: 

Love, by its nature, is a resemblance to God, insofar as this is 
humanly possible.*'' 

Such is the aim throughout the ascent of the ladder: to follow Christ, 
to become "like God," to imitate and resemble Him in His divine 
love. 

The Christian, however, does not only imitate; he also "believes 
rightly." For St. John Climacus spirituality and dogma are essentially 
connected; there can be no true life of prayer without a right faith in 
God. "It is characteristic of The Ladder,'' writes the Serbian D. Bog- 
danovic, "that in it dogmatic themes are constantly overflowing into 
the ethical realm. Dogma forms here . . . the theoretical basis of eth- 
ics."*** As Archimandrite Sophrony observes, throughout The Ladder 
John raises the discussion "from the purely ascetic to the mystical and 
theological level."*' 

From this it follows that The Ladder, in common with any authen- 
tically Christian work of spirituality, is theocentric rather than an- 



4*'>. I (6.(.iB), p. 74. Compjre the last letter of the spiritual alphabet, 26 (11)17(;), p. 
2,12: "With (lod's help ;i[i imitator i>f the Lord." 

47. UmiSAH), p. 2H6. 

4K. jean (^liirniijttf dans la litlcratiire hyzutiline et la litterature serhe ancienne (Belgrade 
IWK), p. 21«. 

•i'f. "I)e hi tieeessite des troi.s rcnoncemcrits che/. St. ("a.ssicn le Rimiaii) et Si |enii 
Cliiiiiii|U(.-", Studiii I'atnnku v (/'f.rff ttnd Vatenuchiingen Hi): Berlin I^Cii), p, t'^*! 



17 



INTRODUCTION 



thropocentric; its purpose is not to analyze psychological states, 
considered in themselves, but to see the human person always in its 
relationship with God. To quote Bogdanovic once more, "For Clima- 
cus the virtues are not so much qualities of man as qualities of God; 
they are divine attributes."-^" Man becomes virtuous by participating 
in the virtues or energies of God. 

John usually takes for granted this link between spirituality and 
dogma without alluding to it explicitly, but such occasional refer- 
ences as he makes to dogmatic questions are sufficient to indicate the 
closeness of the connection. He explains, for example, the relation be- 
tween obedience and stillness (hesychia) by comparing the doctrine of 
the Trinity with that of Christ," and goes on to illustrate the interde- 
pendence between prayer and the remembrance of death by invoking 
the definition of Chalcedon (451); 

Some claim that prayer is better than the remembrance of 
death. But for my part, my praise goes out to the two natures 
in one person.'^ 

In other words, prayer and the remembrance of death are both equal- 
ly necessary, the two form a unity similar to that between Christ's 
humanity and His divinity. 

The most significant among the Christological references in The 
Ladder is the brief allusion to Gethsemane in Step 6: 

Christ is frightened of dying but not terrified, thereby clear- 
ly reveahng the properties of His two natures. ^^ 

John is thinking here of the Monothelete controversy which was rag- 
ing in his day, and in which his contemporary St. Maximus the Con- 
fessor was deeply involved. Although John was less directly 
concerned with the dispute, from his words here it is evident that he 
took the same view as Maximus. The Monotheletes held that our 



50. Op. cit., p. 218. 

51. 27(1117A), p. 273, 

52. 28(1137A), p. 279. 

53. 6 (793C), p. 132. On this passage, see D.J. Chitty, The Desert a Oty (Oxford 
1966), p, 174. 



18 



INTRODUCTION 



Lord, while possessing two natures, was endowed with only a single 
will. Against this Maximus argued that human nature without a hu- 
man will is an unreal abstraction. If Christ is truly man, then He has 
two wills as well as two natures; and it is precisely at His agony in the 
garden that we see the presence of these two wills most plainly mani- 
fested — in tension, yet in ultimate reconciliation. John's standpoint in 
Step 6 is similar. The passage quoted is to be understood as a gloss on 
Hebrews 4:15,"... tempted in everything just as we are, only without 
sin." Christ's fear of death indicates that He has a genuinely human 
nature, and so a genuinely human will, for He could not experience 
such fear in His divine nature or His divine will. At the same time 
John makes a further point by distinguishing/ear of death from terror 
of death. It is, he says, natural for man, living under the conditions of 
the fall, to fear death; terror of death, on the other hand, comes from a 
sense of unrepented sins. Now Christ is not Himself a sinful man, but 
at His Incarnation He accepts to live out His earthly life under the 
conditions of the fall. He therefore accepts the fear of death natural to 
fallen man; but, being Himself sinless, Ha does not experience the 
sinful terror of death. 

In all this John, like Maximus, is not just splitting hairs. The doc- 
trinal point, technical though it may be, is vital for spirituality. Imita- 
tion of Christ, in a full and genuine sense, is only possible because 
God has become completely man, taking upon Himself the entirety of 
our human nature — including a human will — and so experiencing 
from within all our moral conflicts, our fears and temptations, "only 
without sin." Because we see in Christ a human will exactly like ours, 
yet freely obedient to the will of God, we know that such free obedi- 
ence is also possible for us. Here it becomes evident, in a very clear 
and direct manner, how a correct spirituality depends upon correct 
doctrinal teaching. 

Faith in the two natures and two wills of the incarnate Savior im- 
plies that the spiritual way, understood as an "imitation of Christ," 
involves the convergence or "synergy" {synergeia) of two factors, un- 
equal in value but both equally necessary: divine grace and human 
freedom. "Without Me you can do nothing" (John 15:5): what God 
docs is incomparably the more important. Yet our part is also essen- 
tial, for (lod does not save us against our will. This is exactly the posi- 
tion of Si. John (^limiKiis. At first sight it might appear ihal in the 
Ludikt he overstresscs the human aspect, putting too greiii .\n fiiiplm- 



19 



INTRODUCTION 



sis on man's effort and saying too little about God's initiative. But in 
fact he is in no doubt whatsoever about the necessity for divine grace: 

Anyone trained in chastity should give himself no credit for 
any achievements. . . . When nature is overcome it should be 

admitted that this is due to Him Who is above nature 

The man who decides to struggle against his flesh and to 
overcome it by his own efforts is fighting in vain. . . . Admit 
your incapacity. . . . What have you got that you did not re- 
ceive as a gift either from God or as a result of the help and 
prayers of others?. . . It is sheer lunacy to imagine that one 
has deserved the gifts of God.''* 

John is certainty no Pelagian! 

"Joyful Sorrow": The Ladder as Dialectical Theology 

". . . always bearing about in our body the dying of the Lord Je- 
sus, that the life of Jesus may also be made manifest in our body" (2 
Cor. 4:10): the imitation of Christ signifies sharing at one and the 
same time both in His death and in His resurrection. But does not St. 
John Climacus lay too much stress upon the burdens of cross-bearing, 
and too little upon the joyfulness of the risen life? Does not The Ladder 
serve to repel rather than to encourage? 

It is certainly true that The Ladder offers no encouragement to 
those who look for compromise. John asks from us, in Christ's name, 
a complete, unsparing dedication. Nothing is ever enough. Yet he is 
not cruel or inhuman. He criticizes Evagrius' directives on fasting 
precisely for their lack of humanity: Evagrius fails to allow for hu- 
man weakness, John says; we need to grow accustomed gently to the 
rigors of fasting, advancing little by little." Although his strictures 
on the failings of his brother monks come close at times to caricature, 
John is scarcely ever censorious: "his attitude," as Dr. Muriel Heppell 
remarks, "is that of the Publican rather than the Pharisee."^^ He free- 
ly admits his own defects, confessing that he cannot say much, for in- 



54. 15 (S81A, 884BC, WOB), pp. 172, \7}, 1K4; 2.! (96KB), pp. 208-^. 

55. 14(865AB), p. 166. 

56. Introduction to The Ladder of Dmine Ascent, ET Archimandrite Laz.arus, p. 1" 



20 



INTRODUCTION 



stance, about insensitivity because he is himself "very sorely tried by 
this vice."^'' 

The key to a true appreciation of The Ladder is to recognize 
throughout its pages a dialectical approach. Those who see in the 
work nothing except harsh demands for self-denial and ascetic strug- 
gle have discerned only one side of the dialectic. But, alongside the 
negations, again and again there is a positive note of reassurance and 
hope. 

Fundamental to John's dialectical attitude is his sense of the reali- 
ty of the fall. Throughout The Ladder an all-important distinction of 
levels has to be made: Is John speaking about the fallen or the unfallen 
state? Concerning the fail and the resuhing distortion of human na- 
ture, John is indeed highly negative, although never sweepingly con- 
demnatory in the manner of Augustine or Calvin; he nowhere 
suggests that the fall has led to a total corruption. But when he speaks 
about the condition prior to the fall — about humankind's true and 
natural state, which in Christ we can now regain — he is not only af- 
firmative but optimistic. John is no Manichaean. Human nature in its 
entirety, body as well as soul, is God's creation, and is therefore good: 
"God neither caused nor created evif'^^ g^p j^ extrinsic to our true 
personhood; "No one wants to sin against God.''^' There are many 
natural virtues, but no natural vices: 

Evil or passion is not something naturally implanted in 
things. God is not the creator of passions. On the other 
hand, there are many natural virtues that have come to us 
from Him 

— and these include the highest virtues of all, faith, hope and love.^° 
Such, then, is the basic dualism underlying John's ascetic theol- 
ogy: not a dualism between God and matter, for God is the creator of 
matter; not a dualism between soul and body, for The Ladder views the 
human person as an integral unity; but a dualism between the unfal- 



57. l»(9,!.iB), p. 1V2. 

5W. 26(H16K(;), p. 2';i. 

5W, l()(H4';i)), p. 1.56. 

60, 26(I(]2KA), p. 2.tK. 



INTRODUCTION 



len and the fallen, between the natural and the contranatural, be- 
tween immortality and corruption, between life and death. 

True to this dialectical approach, throughout The Ladder John 
balances negations with affirmations. The monk is "a soul pained by 
the constant remembrance of death," yet the motives for his renunci- 
ation are positive: not just sorrow for sins and fear of punishment, 
but love of God and longing for the future Kingdom.''' The monas- 
tery is "a tomb before the tomb," but it is also "heaven on earth."" 
Exile involves a painful sacrifice — the loss of parents, friends, famil- 
iar surroundings — but its overriding motive is creative, to make us 
free for God: "Exile is a separation from everything, in order that one 
may hold on totally to God."" Obedience is "a total renunciation of 
our own life . . . death freely accepted," but it is also a "resurrec- 
tion."^* We are to hold the hour of death in constant remembrance, 
regarding each day as our last;''^ at the same time we should await 
death "as though it were life."" 

Everywhere John negates in order to affirm. This is true in par- 
ticular of the chapter which to most contemporary readers appears 
the harshest and most distasteful of all: Step 5 on repentance, with its 
grim portrayal of the "Prison" at the Alexandrian monastery. Per- 
haps John meant us to be shocked by it: "One may suppose," says Fr. 
Derwas Chitty, "that the writer intended those who were not ready 
for his work to be put off by this chapter."^'' Yet, even so, the image 
of repentance that emerges is ultimately positive. If repentance is 
"hell,"^^ it is also and more fundamentally "resurrection."*^ It is not 
just death but life — the renewal of our baptismal regeneration. '^^ It is 
not despair but hope: 



. 61. 


1 {63 30, p. 74. 


62. 


4(716B, 713B), pp. 113, III 


6.i. 


3 {664C), p. 85. 


64. 


4 (6K0A), pp. 91^92. 


65. 


6 1797C), p. I3S. 


66. 


4 (70.5 B), p. 106. 


67. 


The Desert a City, p. 174, 


68. 


5 (769B), p. 124. 


69. 


5 (781A), p. 131. 


70. 


5 (764B), p. 121. 



22 



INTRODUCTION 



Repentance is the daughter of hope and the refusal to de- 
spair. (The penitent stands guilty— but undisgraced.) Repen- 
tance is reconciliation with the Lord.^' 

To repent is not only to fear God's wrath but to respond to His love: 
the grief that accompanies penitence is "the grief that comes from 
loving God."'^ 

John's dialectical approach is similarly evident in Step 7, on sor- 
row and weeping. This chapter on the gift of tears has proved to be 
one of the most influential in the whole of The Ladder.''^ God, so John 
points out forcefully— and here his basic optimism is plainly in evi- 
dence — created us for laughter, not for tears: 

God does not demand or desire that someone should mourn 
out of sorrow of heart, but rather that out of love for Him he 
should rejoice with the laughter of the soul. Take away sin 
and then the sorrowful tears that flow from bodily eyes will 
be superfluous. Why look for a bandage when you are not 
cut? Adam did not weep before the fall, and there will be no 
tears after the resurrection when sin will be abolished, when 
pam, sorrow and lamentation will have taken flight.''* 

Tears, then, reflect man's fallen state and express his mourning 
for sin, Yet there is more to them than that. Tears can be "sweet" as 
well as "bitter."^5 'Pears that begin by being "painful" become in 
course of time "painless"; tears of fear develop into tears of love.^'' 



71. fbid. 

72. 5(776D), p. 128. 

73. The basic modern study on the gift of tears is still I. Hausherr, Pentios. La doc- 
tnnvilela componction dans I'Orknt chretien (Orientalia Christiana Anahcta 132: Rome 1944), 
i-s[>fcially pp. 1 57-73. See also M Lot-Borodine, "Le mystere du 'don des larmes' dans 
r(>ricnt Chretien", l.a vie spiritiielle (supplement for September 1936), reprinted in O. 
(Jcment and others, f.a douhttreuse joi( (Spirituaiite orientate 14: Bellefontaine 1974), pp. 
i.tl-9.?; I,. Ciillct, "The Gift of Teans", Sobomost n.s. 12 (1937), pp. 5-10; G.A. 
Maloncy, The Mystic of Fire and Light: St Symeon the \'eiv Theologian (Denvilte, N.J. 1975), 
pp. 129-37; K, Ware, "The Orthodox Experience of Repentance", Sohomosi ii (19811) 
pp. 26-2K. 

74. 7(8090, p. HI. 

75. 5 (776A), p. 127. 

76. 7{813B), p. 143. 



2} 



INTRODUCTION 



True to his fundamental dialectic, John insists that for the penitent 
Christian sorrow is constantly interwoven with joy. Tears, like the 
experience of repentance, spring from a sense not only of our sinful- 
ness but of God's mercy; there is gladness in them as well as grief. 
John sums up the point in the composite word cbarmolypi, apparently 
of his own invention, signifying "joyful sorrow."" The repentant 
person is like a child who cries, yet smiles in the middle of his tears. ''^ 
Spiritual mourning leads to spiritual laughter; it is a wedding gar- 
ment, not a funeral robe: 

The man wearing blessed, God-given mourning like a wed- 
ding garment gets to know the spiritual laughter of the 

soul.'"' 

Joy goes with sorrow like honey in a comb: 

As I ponder the true nature of compunction, I find myself 
amazed by the way in which inward joy and gladness mingle 
with what we call mourning and grief, like honey in a comb. 

Such compunction, he immediately adds, is a divine charism, not just 
the fruit of human striving: 

There must be a lesson here, and it surely is that compunc- 
tion is properly a gift from God^° 

—a gift, he notes, not conferred upon all, but only upon such as God 
chooses in His own wisdom." 

There are, however, many different kinds of tears, and it is im- 
portant to discriminate between them. The basic distinction is be- 
tween tears that are simply the consequence of our own efforts, and 
those that come as a gift from God^^^in other words, between "ordi- 



il . 


7 (HtWB), p. 


137. 


78. 


7 (813B), p. 


143. 


. 79. 


7 (809A), p. 


140. 


80. 


7(812A), p. 


141. 


81. 


7 (808A), p. 


139. 


82. 


7 (80.iD). p. 


1 39. 



24 



INTRODUCTION 



nary and natural tears" and tears that are "spiritual. "^^ As John ob- 
serves, this is a distinction not always easy to apply in practice: 

This problem of tears, especially where it concerns begin- 
ners, is a very obscure matter and hard to analyze since tears 
can come about in various ways. Tears come from nature, 
from God, from suffering good and bad, from vainglory, 
from licentiousness, from love, from the remembrance of 
death »* 

Here John indicates at least three levels; these may be designated — 
although John himself does not actually use this terminology — as con- 
tranatural, natural, and supranatural. First, tears may come "from 
vainglory, from licentiousness." Tears of this kind, tears of frustra- 
tion, anger, jealousy or self-pity, are contranatural, an expression of 
our fallen self, and as such they are sinful and injurious. Second, our 
tears may be natural, the result of spontaneous human feelings; in 
that case they may be neutral, neither good rtor bad, or they may have 
an effect for good, as with the healing and purifying tears that we 
shed for the departed. It is not always easy to distinguish between the 
second level and the third, between natural tears that are pure and 
beneficial, and the spiritual or supranatural tears that are, in a direct 
and special sense, "from God." Nature presupposes grace, and grace 
builds upon nature; so it is possible for natural tears to develop, grad- 
ually and almost unnoticed, into spiritual tears, without the point of 
transition being clearly evident to the one who weeps. John believes, 
nevertheless, that a distinction needs to be made, and that it is only to 
the supranatural or spiritual tears that the title ''gift of tears" can 
properly be applied. 

When John speaks of "spiritual" tears, it should not be imagined 
that he means tears that are merely inward and metaphorical. Tears, 
in his view, even when spiritual, are still manifested visibly and phys- 
ically; by the "gift of tears" he means something specific and con- 
crete. Spiritual tears are not merely an event within the soul, but 
form part of the spiritualization of the body and its physical senses. 



81 7 (HIIKC), p HO. 

84. 7 |8(I8H), p[> I *9 ^(1. 



25 



INTRODUCTION 



When genuinely spiritual, tears are a renewal of baptism, and 
even stand on a level higher than baptism itself: 

The tears that come after baptism are greater than baptism 
itself, though it may seem rash to say so. Baptism washes off 
those evils that were previously u'ithin us, whereas the sins 
committed after baptism are washed away by tears. The bap- 
tism received by us as children we have all defiled, but we 
cleanse it anew with our tears. If God in His love for the hu- 
man race had not given us tears, those being saved would be 
few indeed and hard to find.^^ 

Here the positive character of spiritual tears is manifest. Baptism is 
renunciation of sin, but it is also in a positive sense rebirth, resurrec- 
tion, entry into new life. The same is true of the "joyful sorrow" of 
supranatural tears: negatively it involves mourning for our sins, but 
positively it expresses joy at our reconciliation. The prodigal son 
wept as he sat in exile among the swine, shedding tears of sorrow for 
his sins. But no doubt he also wept on his return home, when the Fa- 
ther embraced him, clothed him in the festal robe, and put a ring on 
his hand; and this time the tears were sweet rather than bitter, ex- 
pressing joy at the love with which he had been welcomed back. The 
gift of tears includes both these moments on our inward pilgrimage. 
St. Isaac the Syrian, John's younger contemporary— but there is 
no reason to believe that they knew each other— develops this same 
point in his own characteristic way. Tears, he says, mark the point of 
transition, the frontier between the present age and the age to come. 
The newborn child weeps on first coming into the world; in the same 
way the Christian weeps as he is reborn into the age to come: 

The fruits of the inner man begin only with the shedding of 
tears. When you reach the place of tears, then know that 
your spirit has come out from the prison of this world and 
has set its foot upon the path that leads towards the new age. 
Your spirit begins at this moment to breathe the wonderful 
air which is there, and it starts to shed tears. The moment 
for the birth of the spiritual child is now at hand, and the 



85. 7(804B), p. 137. 



26 



INTRODUCTION 



travail of childbirth becomes intense. Grace, the common 
mother of us all, makes haste to give birth mystically to the 
soul, God's image, bringing it forth into the light of the age 
to come. And when the time for the birth has arrived, the 
intellect begins to sense something of the things of that other 
world — as a faint perfume, or as the breath of life which a 
newborn child receives into its bodily frame. But we are not 
accustomed to such an experience and, finding it hard to en- 
dure, our body is suddenly overcome by a weeping mingled 
with joy.***' 

Here we catch precisely the same note as we have heard already in 
The Ladder; as John puts it, "joy and gladness mingle with what we 
call.rnourning and grief." 

1 he cardinal importance of tears is manifest, but are they essen- 
tial} Did St. John Climacus consider that only those who have passed 
through this particular experience of weeping can be regarded as tru- 
ly repentant and genuinely reborn into tho "new age"? St. Symeon 
the New Theologian (949-1022), who is much influenced by John's 
theology of tears, certainly came close to adopting such a view. But 
John himself is more cautious. We should allow, he urges, for differ- 
ences in temperament: some shed tears with the utmost difficulty, 
"like great drops of blood," while others do so "with no trouble at 
all"; God looks, not at the outward intensity of weeping, but at the 
inward struggles of our heart. Those who have been granted the gift 
of tears should on no account imagine themselves superior to those 
who lack it. "Some are not granted the gift of mourning," but the des- 
olation that they feel at their tack of tears may take the place of the 
gift itself.*' 

It seems that John's attitude is more qualified than Symeon's. 
While Symeon thinks in terms of the way of tears, John thinks rather 
of the gift of tears. For Symeon tears are the King's highway, the roy- 
al road that all are to follow. For John tears are a charism conferred 
only upon some, whereas on others God bestows some different gift 
that takes its place. 



NA. Mystic Treatises hy Isaac of Sim-jeh, f- T A. J. VVensinck (Amstcrd:iin \'>1 1), fi, H5 
(iiilii]itccl). 

H7, 7 (KOK;, KO'JD), pji MK-V, 141. CC, ;r, (1()K«()K [>, 2^V. 



27 



INTRODUCTION 



''My Helper and My Enemy": The Ambivalence of the Body — Em, the 
Passions, Apatheia 

The dialectical stance displayed by St. John Climacus in his treat- 
ment of repentance and tears is to be seen equally in his attitude to 
the human body. The body is both adversary and friend: adversary 
inasmuch as it has been marred by the fall, friend inasmuch as it re- 
mains God's creation and is called to share in the resurrection glory. 
To appreciate John's attitude aright, and to avoid unjustly accusing 
him of an anti-Christian body-soul dualism, it is important to deter- 
mine on what level he is speaking in each particular passage: whether 
of the body in its true and natural state, as formed by the Creator, or 
of the body as we know it now, in its contranatural or fallen condi- 
tion. 

It is not difficult to find negative statements about the body in 

The Ladder: 

Those gifted with the heart's depth of mourning regard 
their lives as detestable, painful, and wearying, as a cause of 
tears and suffering, and they turn away from their body as 
from an enemy. 

Treat your body always as an enemy, for the flesh is an un- 
grateful and treacherous friend. The more you look after it, 
the more it hurts you. 

The man who pets a lion may tame it but the man who cod- 
dles the body makes it ravenous. 

Some wise men have said that renunciation is hostility to the 
body. 

A monster is this gross and savage body.^^ 

But, as the context makes clear in these passages, it is the body m 
its fallen state that John has here in view. Elsewhere he treats the 
body not as irreclaimably hostile but as ambivalent. By virtue of the 



88. 7(K08B), p. 139;9(«41C), p. 153; 14 {«64D), p. 165; 15(«H1D), p. 173; 26 (H)16D), 
p. 232. 



28 



INTRODUCTION 



fall it is hindrance and enemy; but by virtue of its creation by God it 
is partner and friend: 

By what rule or manner shall I bind this body of mine?. 
How can I hate him when my nature disposes me to love 
him? How can I break away from him when I am bound to 
him forever? How can I escape from him when he is going to 
rise with me? How can I make him incorrupt when he has 
received a corruptible nature? ... He is my helper and my 
enemy, my assistant and my opponent, a protector and a 

traitor I embrace him. And I turn away from him. What 

is this mystery in me? What is the principle of this mixture 
of body and soul? How can I be my own friend and my own 
enemy?^^ 

In this passage, significantly John implies that there is a continu- 
ing link between soul and body: "I am bound to him forever ... he is 
going to rise with me." For the Christian the body is not a tomb or 
prison, not a piece of clothing to be worn for a time and then cast 
aside, but an integral part of the true self. Scripture teaches us to be- 
lieve not just in the immortality of the soul but in the resurrection of 
the body. Even though, as a result of the fall, body and soul are sepa- 
rated at death, this severance is no more than temporary, and we look 
beyond it. The body's vocation, therefore, is to be sanctified and 
transfigured along with the soul: it is to be rendered spiritual, with- 
out thereby losing any of its God-given materiality. "Your body," we 
are told, "is a temple of the Holy Spirit . . . glorify God with your* 
body" {1 Cor. 6:19-20); Christ "will transfigure the body of our hu- 
miliation, so as to conform it to His own glorious body" (Phil. 3:21). 

St. John Climacus shares the standpoint of St. Paul. Alongside 
the jjassages in The Ladder which treat the body as an enemy, there are 
olhers that speak positively about its participation in the spiritual life, 
its resurrection and its final glory. The gift of tears, already dis- 
cussed, is part of the process of bodily transfiguration: it represents 
tin- spirituali/ation of the senses. Nor is it only in Step 7 that this 
(heme of bodily glory is in evidence. At the very outset of The Ladder 
jolui rtffinns thai the monk's aim is "a body made holy";'*" we seek "to 



K9 \S (yOlC -'JIM A I, pp. IKS A, 
9)1 1 KiltC), |>. 74 



2V 



INTRODUCTION 



ascend to heaven with the body.'*'^' The same point recurs later in the 
work- "Everyone should struggle to raise his clay, so to speak to a 
place on the throne of God. ... I do not think anyone should be 
classed as a saint until he has made holy his body, if indeed that is 
possible."^2 And what he here regards as a doubtful eventuality, else- 
where he affirms as a realized fact: 

A man flooded with the love of God reveals in his body, as if 
in a mirror, the splendor of his soul. . . . Men who have at- 
tained this angelic state often forget to eat, and I really thmk 
they do not even miss their food. . - . Indeed I suspect that 
the bodies of these incorruptible men are immune to sick- 
ness, for their bodies have been sanctified and rendered in- 
corruptible.''-' 

In certain instances, so John believes, bodily resurrection has ac- 
tually been anticipated; one example is Hesychius the Horebite, 
whose tomb was found to be empty.^^ Hesychius' experience is a 
striking case of the "inaugurated eschatology" assumed in The Ladder; 
the blessings of the age to come, in John's view, are not merely a fu- 
ture hope, but are also in some measure a present reality in the lives 
of the saints. Already in this life the righteous enjoy the first-fruits ot 
the last things, having "risen to immortality before the general resur- 
rection,"^^ and in this anticipation of the End the body also has its 

John believes, then, in a total sanctification of soul and body to- 
gether Even the passions, although a consequence of the fall and 
therefore no true part of human nature, are merely the distortum of 
the natural impulses implanted in the body (or the soul) by God. 
While repudiating the passions, we should not reject the natural 
God-given impulses that underlie them, but should restore to good 
use that which has become misdirected as a result of the fall. In the 



91. 1 (636B), p. 75. 

92. 26(1064A), p. 248; 15(889C), p. 17». 

93. 30 (11576), p. 288. Cf. the story of the monk Menas at Alexandria, whose body 
flowed with myrrh after his death: 4 (697C), p. 102. 

94. 6 (797 A), p. 134. 

95. 15(K93A), p. 179; cf. 15(9U4C), p. 186; 28 (1 129B), p. 274. 



30 



INTRODUCTION 



warfare against the passions, our watchword should be "transfigure," 
not "suppress"; "educate," not "eradicate": 

We have taken natural attributes of our own and turned 
them into passions. For instance, the seed that we have for 
the sake of procreating children is abused by us for the sake 
of fornication. Nature has provided us with anger as some- 
thing to be turned against the serpent, but we have used it 
against our neighbor. . . . We have a natural desire for food, 
but not surely for profligacy.''^ 

Gluttony, so John tells us here, is a vice, but eating as such is by 
no means sinful; there is nothing wrong about enjoying our food. The 
practice of fasting implies no condemnation upon the action of eat- 
ing, but serves to make that action sacramental and eucharistic. Even 
anger can be turned to good use. As for the sexual impulse, this too is 
a divine gift, and has its role to play in the life of the spirit. John is 
not afraid to take the term for physical love, ero^ — which has in Greek 
many of the same associations as the English word "erotic" — and to 
apply it to our love for God. The erotic impulse is not to be sup- 
pressed but redirected: 

I have watched impure souls mad for physical love (eros) but 
turning what they know of such love into a reason for pen- 
ance and transferring that same capacity for love (ens) to the 
Lord. 

A chaste man is someone who has driven out bodily love 
(eros) by means of divine love [eras), who has used heavenly 
fire to quench the fires of the flesh. ^^ 

Although John says that "bodily love" — meaning in this context /ali- 
en, impure eras — is to be "driven out," yet its place is to be taken, not 
by a state t)f frigid detachment, but by a "divine erotic impulse." Fire 
li quenched by fire, not by water! Even when speaking of physical 



•id. l6(lfH>HC),p. 251, 

V7, S (777A), p, 129; 15 (HKOD), p. 171, 



II 



INTRODUCriON 



INTRODUCTION 



and divine love as "opposites," John still regards the earthly as a true 
image of the heavenly: 

Physical love can be a paradigm of the longing for God. . . . 

Lucky the man who loves and longs for God as a smitten lov- 
er does for his beloved. . . . 

Someone truly in love keeps before his mind's eye the face of 
the beloved and embraces it there tenderly. Even during 
sleep the longing continues unappeased, and he murmurs to 
his beloved. That is how it is for the body. And that is how it 
is for the spirit.*^ 

The importance of these passages has been rightly emphasized by Dr. 
Yannaras.'^ 

Physical eras, then, is not to be considered sinful, but can and 
should be used as a way of glorifying God. Sin is evil, but not the 
body and its natural impulses. The sinfulness of passion resides, not 
in materiality — for as God's creation the material body is good, and in 
any case not all passions are physical — but in the misdirection of the 
human will. Sin is not material but spiritual in its origin; for the devil 
fell before man did so, and the devil has no body. 

These conclusions about eros, the body and the passions are con- 
firmed by an analysis of the term "dispassion" (apatheia), as used by 
John in Step 29 and elsewhere in The Ladder. Dispassion is not nega- 
tive but positive: St. Diadochus of Photice (mid fifth century) even 
speaks of "the fire of dispassion, "'°'' It is a denial of the passions, re- 
garded as the contranatural expression of fallen sinfulness; but it is a 
reaffirmation of the pure and natural impulses of our soul and body. 
It connotes not repression but reorientation, not inhibition but free- 
dom; having overcome the passions, we are free to be our true selves, 
free to love others, free to love God. Dispassion, then, is no mere mor- 
tification of the passions but their replacement by a new and better 
energy. Using once more the language of "inaugurated eschatology," 



yH. 26(1024B), p. 2 36; 30 (1156CD), p. 287. 

99. / metaphysiki tou somatos, pp. 149-66; "Eros divin et eros humain selon S. Jean 
Climaque", Contacts xxi (1969), pp. 190-204. 

100. Century 17: ET Phil., p. 258. 



John defines dispassion, not as a form of death, but as "resurrection of 
the soul prior to that of the body."ioi 

John underlines the dynamic, affirmative character of dispassion 

.^^."rsr °"'^ "'* '"-• '" -"■ "" """ ''« '= ^^ 

Love, dispassion and adoption are distinguished by name 
and name only. ... ' 

To have dispassion ,s to have the fullness of love, by which I 
mean the complete indwelling of God. '"^ 

Dispassion, then, is not indifference or impassivity but burning love 
■rot emptiness but the fullness of divine indwelling. Whereas in Stoic 
cth.cs It tends to be a state of individualistic and self-centered detacT 
'd"t>a"- ""h '" '''' 'f'' '' ""P''^^ ^ P^--^' relationship. To be 

. A man is truly dispa.ss,onate . . , when he k^eps his soul contin- 
ually in the presence of the Lord."i03 ^ "^"""^ 

One thing that dispassion certainly does not mean for John is im- 
.numty from temptation, impeccability, a condition in which JeZ 

'; i^fbTe 'Xs 7' rr'- ^-'r - ^-^-^^y '^'-^ ^^- - sucHta: 

words oth. t" '""ir^''"'' ^"^ ^^ ^1"°^^^ -'^h approval the 
words ot the archdeacon Macedonius: 

^ > i'^'V''^ '"^''' '^" '^^y '^^ "°^' °^' "^ «o"ie ^ould have 
' .t, that they cannot fall. But men fall, yet they can quickly 

J r..se again, as often as this may happen to them," 05 

W.r'f T "T ''"' '''' ^^"^"^ "Dispassion consists, not in no 
longer feeling the passions, but in not accepting them "'o^ 

As mward resurrection, as a personal relationship with God in 
lovc^spassion signifies the return to man's unfallen state m para- 

I lOi. .'9(1 l4S(:t, p. 2H2. 

f- m. i0(l|^6li), p. 2M7;26(II)V2Q p 560 

«rX.":r:;:p"7„"" "- "-''"-'• ^"--- '-^--. - v .., , 

I; 104, H(H6<A), p. 166, 
i, 105, 4(6';6l)l, pp. 10 12, 



32 



J,1 



INTRODUCTION 



dise, the recovery of the "undying beauty" which he possessed "be- 
fore this clay."'°^ In paradise man was not a disembodied soul, but a 
unity of soul and body, a psychosomatic whole; and so dispassion, as 
the return to paradise, involves not the repudiation of the body and 
its impulses but their reintegration with the soul and their deliver- 
ance from "corruption." '°^ 

The Monk and the World: Brotherhood, Obedience, the Spiritual Father 

The Ladder has been blamed, not only for what its critics see as 
undue severity and pessimism, but also for its apparent individual- 
ism. It has been pointed out that in none of the thirty steps does St. 
John Climacus say anything at all about the Church. He never speaks 
of the episcopate, and his few allusions to the clergy are on the whole 
uncomplimentary.!"'' He writes for the most part as if the monastic 
community existed entirely on its own, without forming part of any 
wider ecclesial structure; the all-embracing unity of Christ's Body 
seems to be ignored. Scarcely any reference is made to the heavenly 
Church: the Mother of God is not once mentioned, and although John 
does speak regularly about the angels, there is very little about the 
communion of saints. The liturgy, the sacraments, the Church festi- 
vals are only touched on once or twice in passing. 

Silence, however, does not necessarily imply contempt. Pope 
Gregory the Great in his huge masterpiece the Moralia says almost 
nothing about the Eucharist, although the work was written at the 
very heart of ecclesiastical life in Rome; Bernard of Clairvaux, in a 
sermon dehvered at Mass on Maundy Thursday, makes no more than 
a single brief allusion to Holy Communion. "° Failure to mention 
such things need not mean that they are being dismissed as peripher- 
al; perhaps they are everywhere presupposed, like the air we breathe 
and the light that enables us to see. 

John in any case is writing specifically for monks, and so it is not 
surprising if he has little to say about Church life outside the monas- 
tery. As a matter of fact, he does sometimes speak of the monk's ser- 
vice to society. The monk helps others, so he believes, not so much 



1U7. 29(1149D), p. 284. 

108. 29(1I48B), p. 282. 

109. See, for example, 4 (701C), p. 104; 14 (86.iA), p. 166. 

110. C. Butler, Ways of Christian Life (London 19J2), pp. .iKS2, 



34 



INTRODUCTION 



visibly as invisibly—not through exterior works but through inward 
prayer, and by acting as a presence, a sign, an example: 

Angels are a light for monks and the monastic life is a light 
for all men. Hence monks should spare no effort to become a 
shining example in all things, and they should give no scan- 
da! in anything they say or do. " ^ 

When dealing with his primary theme, life inside the monastery, 
John is certainly no individualist. On the contrary, he insists very 
strongly upon the communal character of the monastic life. No one, 
he stresses, should embark on the solitary life unless he has first un- 
dergone the experience of living with others, either in a fully orga- 
nized monastery or in some smaller spiritual "family" pursuing the 
third way. Throughout Step 4, in particular, John underscores the ne- 
cessity for adequate preparation before withdrawing into solitude, 
and the dangers of pride to which the hermit is exposed. ^'^ 

The two aspects of community life to w^ich John attaches partic- 
ular importance are brotherly love and obedience. Love forms the top- 
most rung on the spiritual ladder— love for God, but also love for 
neighbor, since the two are inseparable; "He who loves the Lord has 
first loved his brother, for the latter is proof of the former,"ii3 Love 
for neighbor signifies first of all love for my immediate neighbor, and 
so in the monk's case it means love for his fellow monks dwelling 
with him in the same community. The true monk shares to the full in 
the joys and sorrows of each brother— "he weeps for the sins of that 
brother and is delighted by his progress"^'*— although this love does 
not need always to be expressed outwardly in words. '^^ As we have 
noted, what most impressed John at the monastery that he visited in 
Kgypt was precisely the quality of loving compassion shown by the 
monks toward one another: 

An unbreakable bond of love joined these men together 

Above all, they strove never to injure a brother's conscience. 



111, 26(III20D), p, 2H, 

112, 4(7(JHA, 7(W(:, 7I2A). pp. 107, IIW, i 10, etc. 
11.1, iiiiiH7(:), p. ;hk. 

IH. 4 (705A). p. 106. 

in, hmn:), p, i.i?. 



J 5 



INTRODUC'I ION 



And if ever someone showed hatred of another, the shepherd 
banished him like a convict to the isolation monastery. Once 
when a brother spoke ill of a neighbor, the holy man, on 
hearing him, had him expelled immediately. "I'm not having 
a visible devil here along with the invisible one," he said."* 

Whenever a quarrel arose, those in authority at the Alexandrian 
house worked at once to secure a reconciliation. The brethren them- 
selves, obedient to St. Paul's injunction, "Bear one another's bur- 
dens" (Gal. 6:2), in mutual love gladly took responsibility for each 
other's faults.^'^ It was these features above all that made the monas- 
tery at Alexandria a model in John's eyes. 

Along with brotherly love, the second fundamental virtue of the 
monk in community is obedience. By this John does not mean pri- 
marily obedience to a written monastic rule; in fact, he nowhere 
makes any reference to such a rule. He is thinking in more personal 
terms — of obedience to Christ, and of obedience to the spiritual father 
as the earthly ikon of Christ the Good Shepherd. For a monk in a 
fully organized monastery, the spiritual father will normally be the 
abbot; for a monk following the third way, he will be the geron or 
abba, the "old man" who heads the small monastic "family." 

John is emphatic about the importance of the spiritual father. 
The ascent of the ladder is not to be undertaken in isolation, but un- 
der the immediate direction of a guide. Here John takes up a theme 
central to monasticism from its earliest days."^ In the words of the 
father of Egyptian monasticism, St. Antony: 

I know of monks who fell after much toil and lapsed into 
madness, because they trusted in their own work and forgot 
the commandment that says, "Ask your father and he will 
tell you" (Deut. 32:7). So far as possible, for every step that a 
- monk takes, for every drop of water that he drinks in his cell, 



1 16. 4 (685 A), p. 95; cf. 4 (701 A), p. 104. 

117. 4(685D), p. 96. 

1!8. On .spiritual fatherhood, see 1, Hausherr, Direction spiritudk sn orient autrefuu 
(Orientalia Christiana Anakvta 144; Rome 1955); K. Ware, "The Spiritual Father in Or- 
thodox Christianity", Cross Currents xxiv (1974), pp. 296-3!! 



36 



INTRODUCTION 



he should entrust the decision to the old men, to avoid mak- 
ing some mistake in what he does."^ 

Such also is John's conviction. At the start of The Ladder he speaks of 
the monk's need for "some Moses" to guide him to the Promised 
Land: 

Those of us who wish to get away from Egypt, to escape 
from Pharaoh, need some Moses to be our intermediary with 
God, to stand between action and contemplation, and stretch 
out his arms to God, that those led by him may cross the sea 
of sin and put to flight the Amalek of the passions. '^o 

He returns to the point in the summary at the end of Step 26: 

A ship with a good navigator comes safely to port, God will- 
mg. A soul with a good .shepherd climbs easily heavenward, 
even if it has earlier done much wrong. , 

A man, no matter how prudent, may easily go astray on a 
road if he has no guide. The man who takes the road of mo- 
nastic life under his own direction may easily be lost, even if 
he has all the wisdom of the world. '^i 



The disciple receives guidance from his spiritual father chiefly in two 
ways: first, by modeling himself on the personal example which the 
.spiritual father sets in daily life;'" second, through the "disclosure of 
thoughts," through opening his heart to the spiritual father in what 
John terms "confession" (exomohgisis), a word that can also mean 
"ihanksgiving," This is not exactly the same as the sacrament of con- 
Ifssion, understood as part of the official structure of ecclesiastical 
penance; for while it may sometimes overlap with sacramental con- 
fc.s.si<m, it is broader in scope: 




1 19. /he Sdyiiifis of the Ikscrl l-allxrs, Alfihuht-tical collection, Antony .t7-,lH {I'd 65, 
NHH); Iv'l Si>t<-r Hcneilii'i;! Ward (London 1975), p, 7. 
1211, I (6l.)D 6.U.A), p. 75, 
121. Jft(l()H9B), p. 259. 

p m 4(6H(ll)). p. 91 



37 



INTRODUCTION 



First, the spiritual father to whom the monk confesses need not 
necessarily be a priest. In all the many passages in The Ladder where 
John refers to spiritual fatherhood, as also in the special treatise that 
he wrote on this subject, To the Shepherd, it is in fact nowhere specified 
that the spiritual father should be in priestly orders; and, as we have 
seen, there is no evidence that John himself was so ordained, although 
he certainly exercised the ministry of spiritual fatherhood. 

Second, what the monk confesses to his spiritual father are not 
only his sins but also his doubts and temptations, and still more gen- 
erally his "thoughts" {logismoi), which may be neutral or even God- 
inspired as well as sinful. In this disclosure of thoughts the spiritual 
child lays before his father, so far as he can, all the events that are oc- 
curring in his life, whether outward or inward, even those that seem 
to him insignificant; for the spiritual father may see in them a deeper 
meaning of which the disciple is himself unaware. 

St. John Climacus implies that this confession to the spiritual fa- 
ther will if possible take place daily; and he mentions the practice of 
certain monks at Alexandria who wrote down their thoughts at once 
in a notebook hanging from their belt, which they later showed to the 
abbot, '23 Normally the disclosure of thoughts is in private, but the 
spiritual father may sometimes insist on a public confession, for the 
good of the disciple or perhaps of the community, i^'* Whether the 
confession is private or public, the underlying principle is the same: 
"Nothing gives demons and evil thoughts such power over us as to 
nourish them and hide them in our hearts unconfessed."'^^ But, once 
brought into the open, they become powerless. As one of the monks 
at Alexandria said to John, describing what had happened to him 
after "a bad spiritual failure": 

But since it was never my custom to conceal a snake in the 
hiding place of my heart I grabbed it forthwith by the tail — 
meaning that I ended the matter — and I revealed it at once to 
the healer. He gave me a light blow on the chin, smiled, and 
said to me, "All right, child, go back to your job and do not 



123. 4(70lCD), p. 105. 

124. 4(6SlB), p. 93. 

125. 23 (y76D), p. 211. 



38 



INTRODUCTION 



be in the slightest way afraid." With heart on fire I did as I 
was told, and within a few days I knew I was cured. '2*' 

It is, however, sometimes unnecessary, and even unwise, to con- 
fess sins in detail, for fear of reviving the sinful impulse within us. 
This IS the case in particular with sins against chastity: "Do not in- 
sist," John advises, "on confessing your carnal acts in detail, since you 
might become a traitor to yourself."'" As St. Mark the Ascetic {alias 
Mark the Hermit or Monk) observes, "To recall past sins in detail in- 
flicts injury on the man who hopes in God. . . . They pollute him 
again with the old defilement."'^^ 

In the passage quoted above, it is significant that the Alexandrian 
monk refers to his spiritual father as "the healer." This is characteris- 
tic of The Ladder. When speaking of confession, John employs by pref- 
erence imagery that is therapeutic rather than juridical. Confession 
does not merely bestow absolution from guilt, understood in a formal 
and legalistic fashion, but on a deeper, more organic level it confers 
healing and restoration to wholeness. Sin is disease; to go to confes- 
sion is to enter the hospital and to expose'our wounds; the spiritual 
father is the doctor who makes us inwardly whole by prescribing 
medicines, by bandaging, cauterizing, amputating. '^-^ 

In this relationship between patient and physician— between 
spiritual child and father— what is required first of all from the child 
is openness of heart. If this is lacking, if the disciple in disclosing his 
thoughts deliberately conceals or misrepresents, then obviously the 
whole object of the confession is frustrated; the doctor cannot help if 
the patient lies about his ailments, '^o Besides openness of heart, the 
spiritual child needs to show trust and faithfulness. Look carefully, 
John urges, before choosing your spiritual father; but, having once 
chosen him, remain with him permanently. Those who move light- 



i;!".. 4 (6y7A), p. 102. 

127. 2H (1140A), p. 2H1 

1 2»*. On thnse -a-hii think thai they an made ritrhteotis hy "^orks, 5 1 39 (PG 6^ 9^"2B)- ET 
/'*(/., } l.'l, p. I3H. 

12'>, Kor such iiu-tiipliDrs, sec On- example 4 (71f)A), p. |]2; .^ (776(';), p. H(l, uni) 
»[>me nil /',«;. 2 (1 IAHD I IC'H:). |,,,. j.ii-!. Oti eonfessioti as n f..rni of tieiilinji, mv K, 
Wiirc, "'I'lic OnlirnL.v I'vpcrienie of KefHTilJiice", S„hiinimt li { Vm\) pji 2l-iti, 

HO. I'ml. 7(1IH4A»), p. 2k>. 



V> 



INTRODUCTION 



mindedly from one confessor to another make no progress, and "de- 
serve every punishment from God."^^' Even if your spiritual father is 
guilty of fornication, you should not leave him.'^z It is not for you to 
judge him and his actions: 

When the thought strikes you to judge or condemn your su- 
perior . . . give no trust, place, entry, or starting point to that 
snake. Say this to the viper: "Listen to me. ... I do not judge 
him; he judges me."'^'' 

But of course on his side the spiritual father is responsible before God 
for the example that he sets his disciples: he should act with pru- 
dence, not revealing his own faults too readily, for fear of giving 
needless scandal.'^'* 

What does the spiritual father provide in return for this openness 
and trust? He is, as we have seen, the physician who makes us inward- 
ly whole. This he does, not only by his words of advice, but by his 
life; not only by imparting rules or imposing penances, but by offer- 
ing a personal relationship within which the disciple can grow to ma- 
turity. And this personal relationship is established above all through 
prayer. The spiritual father helps his children by interceding for 
them. This is clearly seen in The Sayings of the Desert Fathers: what you 
say when you visit your abba is "Pray for me." John also insists on 
this, 135 remarking that the obedient monk, even if he raises the dead, 
will nevertheless believe that it is the prayers of his spiritual father 
which have enabled him to do this.'-^'' 

But the spiritual father is more than an intercessor. He is also, in 
John's words, a "mediator" between us and God, an "intermediary" 
(mesitis) who reconciles us to Him.'-^' He is the friend of the Great 
King, who can plead on our behalf with boldness in the royal pres- 



131. 4 (680D, 709D), pp. '>2, 1 10. 

132. 4(724B), p. 117. 

133. 4 (681 A), p. 93. 

134. Past. 8(11K4C), p, 237. 

135. See for example 4 (677D), p. 'M; ]) mm, p 1«0. 

136. 4 (705D-7()KA), p. 107. 

137. 1 (636A), p. 75. 



40 



INTRODUCTION 



ence.'^^ This means, says John, that to sin against our spiritual father 
is in a sense worse than to sin against God: 

What I am going to say to you now must not shock you. . . . 
It is better to sin against God than against our father. If we 
make God angry, our director can reconcile Him to us. But 
if he is angry, then there is no one to speak up for us before 
God.>3« 

The paradox is deliberate, but the point is clear. This mediation, 
furthermore, works in both directions. Not only does the spiritual fa- 
ther represent us to God, but he also represents God to us. His words 
have the value of God's words. As one of the monks at Alexandria 
said to John about the abbot: 

I thought of the shepherd as the image of Christ. ... I 
-, thought of the command [that he gave me] as coming not 
•Si from him but from God.''*° 
!'' ' ' 

Physician, intercessor, mediator — the spiritual father is all this. 
But John goes further still. He also describes the spiritual father as 
anadochos,^*^ the term used for the sponsor or godparent at baptism, 
and so signifying one who takes responsibility for another. In John's 
view, the spiritual father does nothing less than assume responsibility 
for his disciple's sins, for which he will answer before God at the Last 
Judgment. Thus the disciple can face death without anxiety, "know- 
ing with certainty that when it is time to go, not he but his spiritual 
director will be called to render an account. "'"^^ 

"1 thought of the shepherd as the image of Christ," said the Alex- 
andrian monk to John. As sponsor or anadocbos, the shepherd of souls 
is called to be a living ikon of the unique Good Shepherd. He is to 



LfM 


I'lisl. Ml 1721)), p 


. 233. 




13'> 


4 (72St)|, p, IIV, 






H(t 


4 {f.<>2\\). p. W;ct 


. 4 (7IWA), [ 


1. I(W 


HI 


I'ast. Ill IIIM'iH), 


). 2.17, 




Hi 


4(70S»), p, 107, 







INTRODUCTION 



show the same sacrificial love as the Savior displayed when dying on 
the Cross for the sins of the world: 

It is love that shows who is the true shepherd; for by reason 
of love the Great Shepherd was crucified. i"*^ 

Among the many qualities that John mentions in his treatise on spiri- 
tual fatherhood To the Shepherd, this is the most important. The father 
should possess insight, discretion, dispassion, gentleness tempered by 
severity. But above all he needs to show self-emptying love, for with- 
out such love no one can be a shepherd after the image of Christ. He 
needs to have compassion, using this word in its true and full sense; 
he is required to lay down his life for his children, offering up on 
their behalf all that he has and all that he is. As John puts it, "spiritual 
responsibility (anadochi) in the proper sense ... is a laying down of 
one's soul on behalf of the soul of one's neighbor in all matters."'** 

While every monk is called to bear the burdens of others, the 
burden-bearer ^ar excellence is the spiritual father: "Let your father be 
the one who is able and willing to labor with you in bearing the bur- 
den of your sins."'"*^ By thus interpreting the spiritual father's role in 
terms of Galatians 6:2, St. John Climacus shows himself a true follow- 
er of the sixth-century school of Gaza — of St. Varsanuphius, St. John 
the Prophet, and St. Dorotheus — all of whom appeal to the same Pau- 
line precept.'**' Applying their teaching, John gives an example from 
his own experience: for twenty years a monk had suffered from un- 
speakable and blasphemous thoughts, and could gain no relief. Even- 
tually he wrote the temptation on a piece of paper, went to a holy 
man and gave him the paper. After reading it, the old man said: "My 
son, put your hand on my neck. . . . Now let this sin be on my 
neck. . . . From now on, ignore it." At once the brother was freed 



HI I'ust. 5 (1177B}, p. 2.H. 

144. Past. 12(11H3B), p. 2J9, 

14V J (665D), p. H7. Cf. 24 (9H4C), p. 217; Past. 2 {1169B), p. 233; 12 (11H9BC), pp. 
219 41). 

14Ci, \'arsiiiuiphius and John, Correspondence, ed. S. Schoinas {V'olos 1960), §5 168-9, 
IK9. ivi, 199, 203, 206, 239, 4H3; French trans, by L. Regnault (Solesmes 1972), 44 72-73, 
94, 96, 104, lOK, 111, 239, 4K3, et passim. Dorotheus, Instructions iv (ed. L. Regnault, 
Sourm chrcrienncsn [Paris 1963], H 56-57, pp. 240-2); vi (4 79, p. 288). 



42 



INTRODUCTION 



from the thoughts of blasphemy, nor did they trouble him subse- 
quently.'*^ 

From all this it is abundantly clear how exacting, in the eyes of 
St. John Climacus, are the demands made upon the spiritual father. 
There can, indeed, be no earthly vocation higher than this: 

We can offer to God no gift so acceptable as to bring Him 
through repentance souls made in His image. The whole 
world is not worth so much as a soul.'** 



Prayer and Stillness: The Invocation of the Name 

"Prayer," says St. John Climacus, "is by nature a dialogue and a 
union of man with God." As such, it is cosmic in scope, the founda- 
tion of the universe: "Its effect is to hold the world together." '*■* It is 
the primary end for which the human person was created — "What 
higher good is there than to cling to the Lord and to persevere in un- 
ceasing union with Him?"'^° — and it constitutes the touchstone of a 
monk's entire existence: "Your prayer shows where you stand. . . . 
Prayer is a monk's mirror."'^' In the words of Bishop Theophan the 
Recluse: "Prayer is the test of everything. ... If prayer is right, every- 
thing is right."'^^ 

Thanksgiving, penitence, petition — such is the basic sequence to 
be followed when praying: 

Heartfelt thanksgiving should have first place in our book of 
' prayer. Next should be confession and genuine contrition of 



\' 



^ 147. 23 (98I1AH), p. 213. For parallels to this incident in other texts, see J. Gouil- 
\*ri\, "ChristJanisniL' by/antin et slave", Ecote pratique des hautes etudes. V^ section. Sciences 
tvllf'li-li.ies- .tnniinire Iwxii (Fari.s 1974), pp. 215-17. 

I4H. I'asi. 1 I (1 196D), p. 244. John refers to .spiritual brotherhood as well as spiritu- 
NJ fttlherhouii: 1 <i (M92(;), p, 179; 26 (10.S7B), p. 244. 

149. 2K(1129A). p, 274, 

Hll. 28 (1H6A), p. 27H. 

Id. 28 (IH^C), p. 278. 

i <2, In {({iiiTieti (Jhiiritoii ot \ aluiiio, Ih' . In oj I'ruytr: .In (/iihwlo.i . liilMiifi)' (I iiih 
ilod \''iif>). p. !| 



•4* 



IN'I'RODUCTION 



soul. After that should come our request to the universal 
King.'" 

We are not to begin by confessing our sins. Before peering downward 
at our own ugliness, we are to gaze outward and upward at the beau- 
ty of God. So it is in the Divine Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom (not 
that St. John Climacus appeals to this particular example): we do not 
commence with an act of penitence but with a proclamation of divine 
glory, "Blessed is the Kingdom of Father, Son and Holy Spirit. . . ." 
Only after receiving a glimpse of this heavenly Kingdom can we be- 
gin to repent as we should. Otherwise penitence becomes a form of 
grumbling, an expression of bitterness or self-loathing rather than 
hope. Penitence, John adds, should accompany us throughout the 
journey of prayer: "Even if you have climbed the whole ladder of the 
virtues, pray still for the forgiveness of sins. "'^** 

John is categorical about the value of simplicity in our prayer. 
We are to avoid garrulousness, ^o/y/o^/a, multiplicity of words: 

Pray in all simplicity. The publican and the prodigal son 
were reconciled to God by a single utterance. ... In your 
prayers there is no need for high-flown words, for it is the 
simple and unsophisticated babblings of children that have 
often won the heart of the Father in heaven. Try not to talk 
excessively in your prayer, in case your mind is distracted by 
the search for words. One word from the publican sufficed 
to placate God, and a single utterance saved the thief. 
Talkative prayer (polylogia) frequently distracts the mind 
and deludes it, whereas brevity {monologia) makes for concen- 
tration. If it happens that, as you pray, some word evokes de- 
light or remorse within you, linger over it.'^' 

While, then, it is necessary, at any rate in the earlier stages, to use 
words when we pray — "enclose your mind [or thought] within the 
words of your prayer," John urges'^^ — these words should be as di- 
rect, concise and uncomplicated as possible. 



153. 28 (n32A), p. 275. 

154. 28 (II32B), p. 276. 

155. 28(1129D, 1132AB), pp. 275-6. 

156. 28<1132C), p. 276. 



44 



INTRODUCTION 



In thus recommending the use of short, simple prayers, it seems 
that John had in view various possible formulae: this is implied by the 
advice just quoted, "if . . . some word evokes delight or remorse with- 
in you, linger over it." Sometimes, like the Desert Fathers in fourth- 
century Egypt, he suggests the employment of a verse from the 
Psalms: 

Cry out to God, Who has the strength to save you. Do not 
bother with elegant and clever words. Just speak humbly, 
beginning with, "Have mercy on me, for I am weak" {Ps 

6:3).'" 



Elsewhere John proposes a series of different scriptural texts for the 
monk to ponder, leaving him free to choose which he prefers: for, as 
he puts it, "all the loaves of heavenly bread do not have the same ap- 
pearance. "'^b 

There is, however, one type of simple prayer to which John 
attaches particular importance; the invocation or remembrance of the 
Name of Jesus, the Jesus Prayer. '^^ j^ is true that he refers to it only 
three times'^^o in the entire Ladder, so that it cannot be regarded as a 
dominant theme in his spiritual teaching as a whole. In this respect 
there is a marked contrast between John and his follower St. Hesy- 
chius of Sinai, who mentions the Jesus Prayer continually throughout 
his work On Watchfulness and Holiness. But the three passages in The 



157. 15 (900D), p. 184. On the Egyptian practice, see Dom L. Rcgnauir, "La priere 
ciintinueile 'monologisfos' dans la litterature apophtegmatique", Irenikiin xlvii (1974) 
pp. 467-y3. 

158. 27 (I il6A), p. 272. Short prayers can be used in particular during the antipho- 
nal recitation of the Divine Office, while the opposite side of the choir is singiuK' cf 19 
(V37D), p. 195. 

159. For Climacus' teaching on the Jesus Prayer, see "Un .Vloine de I'Egiise d'Or- 
ient" I Archimandrite [.cv Gillet (1892-1980)], La Priere de Jesus (3rd ed., Chevetogne 
1959), pp. 2 7-28: K.r, "A .Monk of the Eastern Church", The Prayer of Jesus, tran.slated by 
"A Monk of the Western Church" (New York/Tournai 1967)," pp." 28-29; I. Hausherr, 
Noms ilu Christ el votes d'araisim lOriaiialia Chrisitana Analecta 157: Rome 1960), pp. 248- 
JJ; K'l" I'hf Name (if Jesus, translated by C, Cummings (Cistercian Studies Series 44: Kalama- 
»,(»ii 1978), pp. 280-6. !■>. Iliuisherr, while rightly protesting thai mo much sluiutd not 
tw read in(o ihi- %hori stntenu-nis of Climacus, surely goes too far iii ilir opposite ilirce- 
(dm, atlopiing un unduly "rediiclionist" view 

160 l'o^^||l|y I here is ii foiinli reference in 9(8410, p, 15 1, where ( :liiiiiit'uii %\\t*\k* 
lit (ifim I prnsevchi. but nioic piulMblv lliis luiMiis ilie Lord's I'myn. 

:; ' % 

45 



INTRODUCTION 



Ladder, since they have greatly influenced subsequent writers, deserve 
to be considered with particular care, 

(1) In Step IS, when discussing the impure thoughts suggested to 
us by the demons immediately before we go to sleep, John says; 

Let the remembrance of death and the concise Jesus Prayer 
go lo sleep with you and get up with you, for nothing helps 
you as these do when you are asleep-^'^i 

Note here, first of all, the words "Jesus Prayer" {lisou evcbi): St. John 
Climacus is, it seems, the earliest author to use this expression. At the 
same time, he describes the Jesus Prayer as "concise" or, more literal- 
ly, as "monologic" (monologistos), a term that means "consisting in a 
single phrase": John seems to be once again the first author to apply 
this adjective to prayer. The epithet monologistos calls to mind the con- 
trast, in the passage cited earlier, '^^ between talkativeness {polylogia) 
and brevity {monologia); thus the Jesus Prayer is being commended as 
an example of short, simple prayer. 

But what exactly does John intend by this term "single-phrase Je- 
sus Prayer"? Nowhere in The Ladder does he give a specific formula. 
The same is true of John's follower Hesychius: while very frequently 
using the term "Jesus Prayer" — and on one occasion the phrase "mon- 
ohgistos prayer" ''■^ — he refrains from giving a precise form of words. 
It has been argued — in particular by Fr. Hausherr — that John merely 
envisages, in a general way, any brief prayer for help, not necessarily 
including the name of Jesus. But in that case why should John say, 
not just "single-phrase prayer," but "single-phrase Jesus Prayer"? 
Surely it is more probable that the prayer contained the actual word 
"Jesus" as part of the "single phrase." The second of our three pas- 
sages, to be considered shortly, confirms this by explicitly mention- 
ing the name of Jesus. 

Yet, if our supposition is correct, it does not therefore follow that 
the "single-phrase Jesus Prayer" contains only the name of Jesus and 
nothing else. To judge from other writers prior to The Ladder or con- 



161. 1.';(889D), p. 178. 

162. 28(113 26), p. 27 5: see above, note \Si. 

163. On Watchfulness and Holiness ii, 72 (PG 93, 1536B); ET Phil., 5 174. p. 193 (the 
translators have added the word "Jesus" before "prayer"). 



46 



INTRODUCTION 



temporary with it, we would expect the name to be combined with 
further words as well; for none of the early texts speaks of employing 
the invocation "Jesus" on its own. Diadochus of Photice, for example, 
advises the use of a prayer beginning "Lord Jesus . . .", apparently fol- 
lowed by something more, although he does not tell us what.'^" Var- 
sanuphius and John of Gaza suggest various formulae, such as:^^^ 

"Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy on me" 
"Lord Jesus Christ, save me" 
"Master Jesus, protect me" 
"Jesus, help me" 

— but never "Jesus" alone. What in later Orthodox spirituality has be- 
come the standard form of the Prayer, "Lord Jesus Christ, Son of 
(lod, have mercy on me," is first found in The Life of Abba Philemon,^*'*' 
an Egyptian text perhaps more or less contemporary with The Ladder. 
It is probable, then, that the "single-phrase Jesus Prayer" contained 
more than the simple invocation of the name. John, however, does not 
tell us exactly what is in his "single phrase," and so it may be that, 
like V'arsanuphius and John of Gaza, he envisages a variety of possi- 
ble texts. Writing as he was at a time when the wording of the Jesus 
Prayer had not yet become stereotyped, he may have preferred to 
leave each reader free to make his own choice among the different 
forms. 

'I'hree matters strike us about the context of the Jesus Prayer in 
Step 1 5. First, it is linked with the remembrance of death. This sug- 
m*.Ms that John saw the Jesus Prayer as, among other things, a prayer 
«»!' contrition and penitence. Probably, then, he expected the Prayer to 
ini'liidc the words "have mercy on me" or the equivalent; as already 
noted, he recommends the use of Psalm 6:3, "Have mercy on me. . . ." 
Second, the Prayer is seen as a weapon against the demons. Third, its 
ILfC is specially commended when on the threshold of sleep. On the 



Ift4, Cenluiy 59, 6h I'hil., |)|>. 270-1. 

165 CitnafKiiulrncf U-ii. Sclioinas), 55 39, 126, 255, 268, 446, 659; TretK-li tniiis l>y 
KrHiintllt, 44 t9. 175, 255, 26K, 446, ft59. Sec al.su l)nrolhl■^l^, l.iff I'f Dusilhi'iii 111 (ctl l<r||(- 
tlKtlll, .ViiHKci ihieltniiu-v '>l, p I IK| 

\M\ I'hitiikiiliii lull ii-iiiH nifitikun ((ireck texl), vol, 11 (Athens I95H1, |i. .'44 tin ih« 
llll|i<irlrilU'c ut «hm WW, it-e II Kiiviu'lu-iiie, "Dale dii It-xle tniditiiniiii'l <li' lii 'I'iI(>)p ill, 
jlfU*' "i MtitaKti Ut riivanhut Jii I'ltliianhe rmsr en liiintpf lUiiJtniale 7 M (191 1), |i|) JKSK, 



47 



INTRODUCTION 



second and the third point, John's approach resembles that of Diado- 
chus.'" 

(2) The second of the three passages occurs in Step 21. John is dis- 
cussing the childish fear that overcomes a monk at night when enter- 
ing some dark place alone. The solution, he says, is to arm yourself 
with prayer: 

When you reach the spot, stretch out your hands and flog 
your enemies with the name of Jesus, since there is no 
stronger weapon in heaven or on earth. '^* 

Here, certainly, John has in view not just any short prayer for help 
but specifically the invocation of the name "Jesus." As in Step 15, this 
is seen as a weapon against the demons. He further suggests a particu- 
lar bodily posture, with the arms outstretched in the form of a cross. 
This he also recommends elsewhere, but without referring to the 
name of Jesus. '^^ 

(3) The third and most important passage comes in Step 27, on 
solitude or stillness: 

Stillness (hesychia) is worshipping God unceasingly and wait- 
ing on Him. Let the remembrance of Jesus be present with 
your every breath. Then indeed you will appreciate the val- 
ue of stillness.' '^ 

There is no explicit reference here to "the Jesus Prayer" or to "the 
name of Jesus," but only to "the remembrance of Jesus." It may be, then, 
that in this passage John is not thinking of a short formula of prayer, 
frequently repeated, but of "keeping Jesus in mind" in a more dif- 
fused and general sense. But it is also possible that the "remem- 
brance" is in fact the same as the "single-phrase Jesus Prayer"; and 
that is how most later readers of The Ladder have understood the text. 
Three points of interest arise in this passage. First, John states 
that the remembrance of Jesus should be so far as possible uninter- 
rupted. In the other two passages the Jesus Prayer or invocation of 



167. Century 3!: Phi!., pp. 261-2. 

168. 21 (945C), p. 200. 

169. 15 (900C), p. 184. 

170. 27 (1112C), pp. 269-70. 



48 



INTRODUCTION 



the name is recommended for use in particular situations — when fall- 
ing asleep, when alone in the dark — but in this third text John envis- 
ages something all-embracing and continuous. Once more, his 
teaching resembles that of Diadochus, who insists emphatically that 
the remembrance or invocation of Jesus shall be unceasing.'''' 

Second, John says that the remembrance of Jesus is to "be pres- 
ent with your every breath"; a more literal translation would run, "be 
united with your breathing." The phrase has been variously inter- 
preted. Some see in it no more than a metaphor: we should remember 
God as often as we breathe"^ — John is simply underlining his point 
about "worshipping God unceasingly." Others give the phrase a far 
more precise sense: in their view, John has in mind a physical tech- 
nique whereby the "single-phrase Jesus Prayer" is linked with the 
rhythm of the breathing. Such a technique is certainly advocated in a 
Coptic source, not easily dated, but perhaps slightly later than John: 



Is it not easy to say with every breath, "Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, have mercy on me; I bless Thee, my Lord Jesus, help 
me' 



'1173 



In the Greek tradition, however, there are no clear and unambiguous 
references to a "breathing technique" until the late thirteenth and the 
early fourteenth century, in the works of St. Nicephorus of Mount 
Athos, St. Gregory of Sinai, St. Gregory Palamas, and others."'* 
ll Now it is true that St. John Climacus accepts the basic principle 
underlying the physical method propounded by these later writers; 



171, Ceniiiry .TO, K5, HH, and especially 97: Phil., pp, 270, 28.i, 287, 29.U4. 

172. Compare, for example, Gregory of Nazian/us, Oration 27, 4 [K 16, 16B), and 
Nllu.i iif Ancyra, Letters I, 2.59 (I'C 79, 169D), where the meaning is apparently no more 
thun nifiaphiirical. 

17.). "The \'irttics of St. Macarius", ed. E. Amclineau, Htstoire ties monasteres dc la 
Htust'l-lgyfilc (Annale.v du Miisee Guimet xxv; Paris 1894), p. 161; cited in J. Couillard, 
hliie I'hiloaiUe <le la /irien- ilu eociir (Pari.s 19.5,1}, p, 68; 2nd ed, (Paris 1968), p, 55, On the 
JfMis I'i'.iycr III ihe (^)ptic Maeanan cycle, see A, Ciiillaiimont, "Une inscription coptc 
«llf til 'I'lirrr ile Jesus'", (hieiiluliii Chiiniaiui t'fiutdka .vx.viv (196K), pp, no 25, "I he 
Jroin l'i,i\cT aiiHjiiK ilie Monks of I'.yypi", liMleni C.hiircha keview vi (19741, pp 66 7| 
I'rolrHMir ( tiiillaiiiiiont dales the U-xl (pioied lo the 7th-Hth centuries 

174, See I, I lausliciT, l.ii methiide d'uraison hhyehaste {Oncnialm Cbnutiim u, tio Irti 
Hmiir 1927); J, (iiiiiiMnnl, "A Note on the Pniyer of the Mean", in J M D^i'lmrt;), 
( hitiian Yfiifii (IVieiinnil l.ihmry New York 1972), pp, 217 Hi; K VVttrp, " llli' Jrallt 
I'rtiviT Iti ht (irrjjnrv ol Siiiiii", liasttin (.'hunhfi Hrrinv iv (Villi, p(i \4 Ift 



4V 



INTRODUCTION 



like them, he recognizes that the mind conforms to the body, that our 
outward posture influences our inward state. '^^ But only in this one 
sentence in Step 27 does he refer specifically to the breathing in con- 
nection with the name of Jesus; the point is not developed, and it 
would be perilous to base too much on a single phrase. In default of 
further evidence, it seems wiser to interpret the words metaphorical- 
ly. Probably the parallel phrase in Hesychius'^'' should also be given 
a metaphorical sense; but Hesychius' wording is slightly more precise 
than John's, for he alters "remembrance of Jesus" to "Jesus Prayer," 
and when speaking elsewhere of the Jesus Prayer he makes a number 
of other references to the breathing. '''' 

Third, in the passage quoted John indicates a connection be- 
tween "the remembrance of Jesus" and the attitude of stillness {hesy- 
chia). Constantly to keep Jesus in remembrance is a way of attaining 
inner quiet: the Jesus Prayer helps to make the monk into a "hesy- 
chast," one who possesses silence of heart. Hesychia^''^ is a key word in 
John's doctrine of prayer, and the step which he devotes to it has 
proved, with the possible exception of Step 7 on the gift of tears, the 
most influential in the whole of The Ladder, By "stillness" he means 
both an outward manner of life — that of the hermit or solitary, living 
in a cell on his own — and also an inner disposition of continual 
prayer, as in the passage under discussion: "Stillness is worshipping 
God unceasingly."'^'' 

It is the second sense that chiefly concerns John in Step 27 — not 



175. 15 (W)OC), p. 1H4; 26 (lOOOD-HlOl A), p. 227; 28 (1133B), p. 277; but in these 
passages there is no reference to the breathing, The allusion to "breathing God" in 4 
(68HC), p. 97, is surely metaphorical. But in 4 (724B), p, 117 and 14 (H69A), p. 169, the 
sense is less clear: John may mean that the repetition of a short phra.sc from Scripture 
is to be linked with the rhythm of the breathing, but once more a metaphorical sense is 
possible- 

17A. "Let ihc Jesus Prayer cleave to your breath \or breathing]": On Watchfulness 
and Holiness \i,m){l'(; 9}. 15-'7D): F.'V Phil, 5 1H2, p, 195, 

177. On Watchfulness and Holiness i, 5; ii, 68, 85, 87 (1481D, 153JC, 1540CD); Phil., 44 
5, 170, 187, 189 (pp. 16.*, 192, 195, 196). But in none of these passages is a metaphorical 
interpretation excluded. 

178. See 1. Ilausherr, "L'hesychasme. Etude de spiritualite", in Hesychasme et priere 
(Orientalia Christiana Analecta 176: Rome 1966), pp. 163-2.17; K. Ware, "Silence in 
Prayer; the Meaning of Hesychia", in B. Pennington (ed.), One yet Two (Cistercian Studies 
Series 29: Kalamazoo 1976), pp. 22-47. 

179. See note 170. 



«n 



INTRODUCTION 



physical isolation but interior silence. Sometimes, certainly, he has in 
view both the outward and the inward at the same time: 

Close the door of your cell to your body, the door of your 
tongue to talk, and the gate within to evil spirits.*^° 

But more often it is the inward level, "the gate within," of which he is 
speaking, as in his celebrated definition of the hesychast: 

Strange as it may seem, the hesychast is a man who fights to 
keep his incorporeal self shut up in the house of the body. ' ^ ' 

The meaning here is, not that the hesychast dwells spatially separated 
from others in the desert, but that he confines within his body the 
powers of his soul, his thoughts, desires, imagination and the rest; he 
is not dispersed, but concentrated upon a single point. The hesy- 
thast's true journey is not outward and physical, into the wilderness, 
but inward and spiritual, into the sanctuary of the heart. John is say- 
ing the same as St. Basil the Great: 

When the intellect is no longer dissipated among external 
things or dispersed across the world through the senses, it 
returns to itself; and by means of itself it ascends to the 
thought of God. '^^ 

The hesychast is the one who has "returned to himself," who has, in 
St. Isaac the Syrian's phrase, "entered into the treasure house that is 
within.""*^ He has constantly within him what John calls "unseen 
meditation," "** "mental prayer" or "noetic activity" {noera ergasia).'^^^ 
L'nderstanding stillness in this inward sense, we see that it is pos- 
niltlc to be a hesychast even though committed to works of direct ser- 
vice to others: the hesychast is not just the solitary, but anyone who 



IHO. 27 (JKHIA), p. 263. 

IHI. 27 (MI97H). p. 262. 

IH2, iHlcrl U'd !2, 228A). 

IHI. .\tYslii I realises, KT Wen.sinck, p. H (atlapted). 

IK4 t (Wi4H), p. H5. 

IHV 4(6K*<:), |>. 'M. 



!1 



INTRODUCTION 



preserves interior silence amidst outward confusion. '^^ This, indeed, 
is the highest form of hesycbia. It is a great thing, says John, to achieve 
stillness in the isolation of a hermit's cell; but "it is incomparably 
greater to have no fear of turmoil, and to remain steadfast under its 
assault with a fearless heart, living outwardly with men but inwardly 
with God.*'i«' 

Interpreted in this manner, as the hidden silence of the heart, he- 
sychia signifies in The Ladder more particularly what Evagrius terms 
"pure prayer" — prayer, that is to say, unaccompanied by words, im- 
ages or concepts. "Stillness means the expulsion of thoughts," writes 
John,'*^ adapting a well-known phrase of Evagrius, "Prayer is the ex- 
pulsion of thoughts."!^'' But "expulsion" is perhaps too violent a 
word. John and Evagrius employ the term apothesis, which means 
"shedding," "putting aside": not a savage extirpation or brutal sup- 
pression of our thoughts, but a gentle yet persistent act of detachment 
or "letting go." 

Heyschia or stillness, then, is the same as "the wordless prayer of 
the spirit," ''^° as distinguished from the singing of psalms and hymns, 
the liturgical prayer of the divine office. Evidently it is this "pure" or 
wordless prayer of stillness that John has in view when he describes 
prayer as "a turning away from the world, visible and invisible,"'^' 
or when he says, "Do not form sensory images during prayer."'''^ 
Such remarks would not be applicable to all forms of praying. 

We can now grasp more fully what John intends when, in Step 
27, he connects the "remembrance of Jesus" with the state of stillness. 
The remembrance or invocation of Jesus is one of the ways — not nec- 
essarily the only one — whereby the aspirant upon the spiritual way is 
enabled to advance from oral to wordless prayer. Here, as so often in 
his teaching on the Jesus Prayer, John seems to be following Diado- 
chus of Photice. The human intellect, so Diadochus observes, cannot 
rest inactive; if it is to be prevented from dispersing itself among a 



186. 4 (700C). p. 10.^. 

187. Past, 9 (n85A), p. 237-, cf. 27 (l(W7B), p. 262. 

188. 27(I112A), p. 269. 

189. On Prayer, 5 70 (PC 79, 1 181C): E'C Phil., 5 71, p. 64. 

190. 19 (9.nD), p. 195: literally "non-material prayer." 

191. 28(HJ3C), p. 277. 

192. 28(11360), p. 279. 



52 



INTRODUCTION 



multiplicity of sensory objects, it must be provided with some inner 
task to satisfy its "need for activity." This need, according to Diado- 
chus, is met by the Jesus Prayer: 

For the complete fulfilment of its purpose we should give 
the intellect nothing but the prayer "Lord Jesus". . . . Let the 
intellect continually concentrate on these words within its 
inner shrine with such intensity that it is not turned aside to 
any mental images. '^^ 

The Jesus Prayer is in itself an oral prayer like any other; but, because 
the words are so very simple, the discipline of frequent repetition 
helps the intellect to gather itself together, to pass from multiplicity 
lo unity, and so to reach out beyond all words into the pure prayer of 
stillness. Such is Diadochus' teaching. John is less explicit, but he 
seems to uphold the same standpoint: the invocation of the Holy 
Name forms the gateway to hesychia. 

Stillness, as we have seen, is defined by Jiohn as the unceasing wor- 
ship of God. For the true hesychast, inward prayer is not so much an 
occasional occupation as a continuous state; it is not merely one activ- 
ity among others, but the activity of his whole life. He strives to fulfill 
the command, "Pray without ceasing" (1 Thess. 5:17). His prayer con- 
tinues even in his sleep; as John puts it, "A hesychast is like an angel 
on earth ... he says, 'I sleep, but my heart is awake' " (Song of Songs 
5i2);''''* he is "at work not only when awake but also when he is 
a.slcep."'''^ In the words of St. Isaac the Syrian, "Even when he is im- 
mersed in sleep, the perfumes of prayer will breathe in his soul spon- 
taneously."'''^ In this way the hesychast is not someone who says 
prayers from time to time, but someone who is prayer all the time. 
I lis prayer becomes in the true sense prayer of the heart, meaning by 
"heart" not only the emotions and affections but, as in Scripture, the 
tntjliiy of the human person dwelling in communion with God. In 
(In- words of The Ladder: "i cried out with all my heart,' said the 



IVl. Ctntury SV: Phil., p. 271). 

194, 27 (IKHtA), p. 261. 

|9(, 27 (I1I6H), p, 272, I'l- 2()(<Mlf:), pp. 197-K. 

|9ft, Mytlit I'rriiims, I''. I VVcnsinik, p, 174. 



51 



INTRODUCTION 



psalmist (Ps. 118:145). He is referring to body, soul and spirit."''^ So 
the hesychast prays with his whole heart, with every aspect of his be- 
ing, conscious, subconscious, supraconscious. He is identified with 
his prayer, 

Divine Light and Divine Love 

Such is the hesychast's aim as he mounts the unseen ladder: a di- 
rect touching, a simple gazing upon God that will be, so far as possi- 
ble, continuous and free from mental pictures and discursive thought. 
And what lies beyond this? John is guarded. He does not use the lan- 
guage of "deification" or "divinization" (tbeosis), widespread among 
the Greek Fathers. But, while offering no detailed descriptions, he 
provides a few hints. The highest level of prayer, he says, is "rapture 
(arpagi) in the Lord,"'''* but he does not develop the point. Once he 
alludes to a visionary experience of his own;'*''* evidently this was ec- 
static in character, for he says, recalling St. Paul's words (2 Cor. 12:2), 
"and whether, during ail this, I was in the body or out of it, I cannot 
rightly say." Yet in this vision it was not with Christ Himself that 
John spoke, but with an angel. 

This is, moreover, an isolated passage; he does not speak else- 
where of receiving such visions. He does, however, refer in a number 
of places to experiences of light or illumination, although it is not 
easy to determine how far the language is intended to be more than 
metaphorical. The main passages are these: 

(1) Overcome by chastity, the lust in our souls "receives that 
non-material (aylon) light which shines beyond all fire."^™ 

(2) Purity of heart leads to "enlightenment" or "illumination." 
This "is something indescribable, an activity [or energy (energeia)] that 
is unknowingly perceived and invisibly seen."^*" 

(3) "The truly obedient monk often becomes suddenly radiant 
and exultant during his prayers. "^'^■^ 



197. 28 (1140B), p. 2N1. For this sense of "heart," as signifying the spiritual center 
of the human person, sec A- Guillaumont, "I.cs sens des noms du coeur dans I'ariti- 
quite", in J.e Cueur (litudes carmelitaines xxix: Bruges 1950), pp. 41-81; "Le 'coeur' che/. 
les spirituels grecs a t'eponue ancienne", DS ii (1V52), cols. 2281-8. 

198. 28 (linD), p. 276. 

199. 27 (1109C), p. 268. 

200. 7 (804C), p. 13 7. Cf,7 (K08D), p. 140, referring to the -ineffable tight" of God, 

201. 7 (813B), p. 143. 

202. 19(937C), p. 195. 



54 



INTRODUCTION 



(4) On humility: "You will know that you have this holy gift 
within you . . . when you experience an abundance of unspeakable 
light."203 

(5) "For the perfect there is increase and, indeed, a wealth of di- 
vine light. ... A soul, freed of its old habits and also forgiven, has 
surely seen the divine light."^°'* 

(6) "In addition to these there is the way of rapture (ekstasis), the 
way of the mind mysteriously and marvellously carried into the light 
of Christ."205 

(7) Some emerge from prayer "as if they were resplendent with 
light."2°^ 

^ (8) "When the heart is cheerful, the face beams, and a man 
flooded with the love of God reveals in his body, as if in a mirror, the 
splendor of his soul, a glory like that of Moses when he came face to 
face with God" (cf. Exod. 34:29-35). 207 

(9) Finally, there is a long passage at the end of the work To the 
Shepherd, in which the shepherd is likened to Moses: 

You have ascended to the heights, you have dispelled all 
manner of darkness and gloom and tempest — I mean the 
thrice gloomy darkness of ignorance. You have drawn nigh 
to that light which is far more awesome, brilliant and sub- 
lime than the flame in the bush. . . . While still in this life, 
you perhaps saw future things from behind (cf. Exod. 
33:23) — I mean that illumination of knowledge which will 
come to pass in the last time. . . . You were glorified in the 
countenance of both your soul and your body.^°^ 

In all of these passages a figurative or metaphorical interpreta- 
tion is by no means impossible. But, particularly in the first, the sec- 
tmd ;ind the eighth, John seems to intend something more than mere 
iiu-laphor. The phrase "non-material light" in the first passage sug- 
Ifcsi.s ihat John has in view a light that is neither merely figurative, 



201, 
:(H, 

2fH, 

307 
Jim. 



2< (9'MA), p. 223. 
2f>(ll(3i»), p. 242. 
2A(1II6SA>, p. 249, 
2M(1H7(;), p. 2HI». 
(IMIil7H), p, 2HH, 
I'ml n (k'O'lC), p 



MH. 



55 



INTRODUCIION 



nor yet physical and created, but spiritual and uncreated. In the sec- 
ond passage the words "invisibly seen," while they could apply to a 
metaphorical enlightenment of the mind, may also denote a higher, 
mystical illumination, whereby the initiate gazes — through his physi- 
cal eyes, and yet in a manner that transcends them — not upon the 
material objects of normal sense-perception, but upon the "non-mate- 
rial" light of God. So far as the eighth passage is concerned, the glory 
shining from the face of Moses, as described in Exodus 34, is certainly 
not just metaphorical, for Moses has to place a veil over his face to 
protect the Israelites from its brightness. John seems to be thinking 
here of the occasions, frequently recorded in the lives of the saints, 
when the body of the holy man or woman shines visibly with divine 
light, as Christ's body shone at the transfiguration on Mount Ta- 
bor.^°'' It is significant that in this passage the light is given an escha- 
tological interpretation: it is an anticipation of "future things," a 
foretaste of the "illumination" that "will come to pass in the last 
time." According to the traditional teaching, the light of the age to 
come is an existent reality, not a mere metaphor. 

With some hesitation, then, we may place St. John Climacus in 
the tradition of the "light mystics" of the Christian East, along with 
the Homilies attributed to St. Macarius (fourth-fifth centuries), with 
St. Symeon the New Theologian (eleventh century), and St. Gregory 
Palamas (fourteenth century). While John is far less explicit than 
they — and certainly we cannot find in The Ladder, in any clearly ar- 
ticulated form, the Cappadocian and Palamite distinction between 
God's essence and His energies^'" — yet John seems to agree w^ith 
them in teaching that the Divinity is revealed as uncreated light, and 
that the human person can participate in this divine light not only 
metaphorically but literally, not only in the age to come but in this 
present life, and not only with the soul but with the body also. 

'i'here are, however, no traces in The Ladder of the parallel tradi- 
tion of "darkness mysticism," represented by Philo the Jew (first cen- 
tury), St. Clement of Alexandria (third century), St. Gregory of 
Nyssa (fourth century), and St. Dionysius the Areopagite (fifth cen- 
tury). When, as in the ninth passage cited above, John refers to the 



209. See K. Ware, "l"he Transfiguration of the Body", in A.M. AUchin (ed.), Sacra- 
ment and Image (Vhc Fellowship of St. Alban and St. Sergius: London 1967), pp. 17-J2. 

210. But in 2> (W.K;D), p. 223, John uses the essence-energies distinction with ref- 
erence to the sun, 



56 



INTRODUCTION 



darkness of Sinai, he takes this as signifying sinful ignorance, not di- 
vine transcendence and mystery. Unlike Philo, Clement, Gregory of 
Nyssa and Dionysius, John lays no particular emphasis upon the 
unknowability of God; the language of apophatic theology is largely 
absent from The Ladder. We are left with the impression that John 
does indeed regard God as beyond human understanding, but he does 
not discuss the matter in detail. 

But, even though John has not followed Gregory of Nyssa in his 
interpretation of the darkness of Sinai, there is another idea, promi- 
nent in Gregory's Life of Moses, that appears also in The Ladder: the no- 
tion of unceasing advance, of perpetual progress through the infinite 
ages of eternity. John does not use Gregory's technical term epekta- 
sis,^^^ but the concept itself is plainly present in his work. Virtue and 
love, he says, are things that have no limit or end-point, either in this 
Jife or in the age to come: 

I There is no boundary to virtue. The psalmist says, "I have 
seen the end of all perfection, but Your commandment is 

very broad and is without limit" (Ps. 118:96) And if it is 

true that "love never fails" (1 Cor. 13:8) . . . then love has no 
boundary, and both in the present and in the future age we 

( will never cease to progress in it, as we add light to light. . . . 

I Even the angels make progress . . . they add glory to glory 

f and knowledge to knowledge. ^'^ 

In ihc la.st step of all he returns to the idea that love has no limit: "It is 
ihe condition of angels, and the progress of eternity. "'^^'' 

In common, then, with St. Gregory of Nyssa, St. John Climacus 
litts a strongly dynamic view of eternity. Movement and progress are 
he mark of life not only here below but in heaven, and this is true of 
ingels as well as humankind. The essence of perfection consists para- 
loxically in the fact that we never become perfect, but advance un- 
JCa.singly "from glory to glory." In John, as in Gregory, the reason 



211. Hill sec 2'' (I UKUC), p. 2H2, which uses the verl> efietieiiiomiii (ef, Phil. I;l-t), 
(horily iiftiirc II description ui afiatheiu in lerms of perpetual progress: ". . llic inieniti. 
sided pcrfcfliiiti of ihc perfect." On efjeiuish, see Ciregory <)f Nyssa, The l.tf't of Mittfi, 
pl'r AJ. Mnllu'rlu- iiiul I',. l\-r^imnHth- CItioia <>/' llhinn .Sfiinttinlily \r« \in\, |i>7H), 
lli|) |ip 12 l-t 

I J13, iftlKIC.HAH), pp .Mil I. 
I J 1.1. HHllMlH). p !H'/. CI, JHlJIi'Jli), p. 27^: pruvrr is ■'ucln.ii mil 1 t.|(d " 



mJUbuj 



INTRODUCTION 



for this view is that both of them envisage eternal life in terms of 
personal love.^''* Eternity is progress, because eternity is love; and a 
relationship of love between two persons is never static, never ex- 
haustively explored, but implies always fresh growth, movement and 
discovery. So it is between human persons; so it is between the divine 
persons of the Holy Trinity; and so it is between the human soul and 
God. 

John is most insistent about the primacy of love, agreeing here 
with his contemporary St. Maximus the Confessor. It is love, so John 
teaches, that makes the human person resemble God "insofar as this 
is humanly possible. "^'^ Love stands higher than any vision or ecsta- 
sy, higher than any mystical revelation. Evagrius, in his scheme of the 
spiritual ascent, regarded gnosis or knowledge as superior to love; but 
for John the summit of the ladder is love, and there can be nothing 
higher than this. 

After all his negative words against sin, after all his austere de- 
mands for self-denial, St. John Climacus concludes the final chapter 
of The Ladder with words that are entirely positive: "Love is the great- 
est of them all."^'^ 



IV. SOURCES AND INFLUENCE 

Personal Experience and Tradition 

The Ladder is both a highly personal work, the fruit of creative 
originality, and at the same time a traditional work, drawing upon 
the past. 

To St. John Climacus, as we have seen,^'' the Christian life was a 
matter of direct experience. It is not enough, he insists, for the spiri- 
tual teacher merely to repeat with accuracy things said by others; 
each must relive for himself what he has inherited from the past. The 
Ladder is therefore, as might be expected, strongly personal in charac- 
ter. John's approach is empirical. He often mentions things that he 



214. In Gregory of Nyssa, epektasis is connected with apophatic theology as well as 
iove: progress is infinite because God can never be known exhaustively, This apophatic 
aspect oi epektasis is not brought out in The Ladder. 

215. 30(11568), p. 2K6. 

216. 30(1160D), p. 290. 

217. See above, pp. 7-8. 



58 



INTRODUCTION 



has himself seen and heard, and men whom he has himself met such 
as John the Sabbaite^'^ or George Arsilaites.^i" But, while John 
speaks about the experience of others, with the reticence characteris- 
tic of the Christian East he keeps silent, except on one occasion, about 
the events m his own inner life. In Step 28 on prayer, for example, we 
may be confident that he is speaking from direct experience yet in 
tact he makes no such claim for himself. 

At the same time throughout The Ladder personal experience is 
interwoven with past tradition. John appeals frequently to the au- 
thority of the Fathers," When he wrote his book, monasticism had 
; already existed as an established institution for more than three cen- 
, turies^The golden age of the pioneers was long since over; there ex- 
isted by John s day a mass of precedents, regulations and written 
' texts, John ,s closely familiar with much of this earlier material al- 
though insisting on his lack of learning, he is in reality far more wide- 
ly read than he would have us believe. The Ladder, as well as being a 
work of personal experience, is a work of synthesis, presenting in 
I summary form the monastic teachings of t'he past three hundred 
years, integrating mto a single whole the many disparate strands of 
previous tradition. It is a first, and remarkably successful, attempt to 
produce a directory" of mona.stic spirituality. 

I As a synthesizer, John Climacus resembles his contemporary 
Maximus the Confessor. What Maximus achieves in the field of Chris- 
lology, John accomplishes in that of ascetic theology. Both lived in 
.he days of Mohammed and witnessed the sudden Arab expansion 
that followed the Prophet's death. They both stood at a point of tran- 
■sitron, at the end of an era, when the newly-established power of Is- 
lam was altering forever the face of the Eastern Mediterranean and of 
Morth Afnca. Each ,n his own way gathered together the fruits of the 
past and transmitted them to a new age. 

What are John's sources? This is not easy to determine; for, while 
he occasionally cites them by name, more often he borrows anony- 
mously. It IS at once clear that he is indebted first of all to the Bible 
from which he quotes with great frequency. Next to Scripture his 
Chief deb. ,s to I he Say,„f,s of the Desert Fathers-known in Greek as the 
Ocront.kon and in Latin as the ,ipof>hthcgmata Patnm-^whkh dales 



JIH, 4 (72(IA-724»), p|,, ] u-j, 
Jl'>, ^7(I|I2M), p. W> 



5V 



INTRODUCTION 



back substantially to the fourth and fifth centuries. ^^o Even when he 
is not quoting directly from this, it has often influenced his style and 
presentation. At the same time, in The Ladder John draws together 
and unites the two major strands in the early spiritual tradition of the 
Christian East: the "intellectualist" approach exemplified by Eva- 
grius of Pontus, and the "experiential" approach represented by the 
Homilies attributed to St. Macarius. 

Although John mentions Evagrius only once, and then with dis- 
approval,^^' and although he makes far less use of technical Evagrian 
terminology than Maximus does, yet traces of Evagrius' influence can 
be seen in many parts of The Ladder. John makes use of the basic dis- 
tinction between the "active" and the "contemplative" life (praxis! 
theoria),^^^ although this is not followed out consistently in The Lad- 
der; he derives from Evagrius much of his demonology and his analy- 
sis of the vices,223 ^y^^ ^lose link between dispassion and love,224 a^d 
the conception of prayer as the laying aside of thoughts.^^^ But John 
discards altogether Evagrius' speculative cosmology; he is less system- 
atic than Evagrius, and more concerned to emphasize the personal 
and conscious experience of grace. 

Whether or not John was directly acquainted with the Macarian 
writings — for he never cites them explicitly — he agrees with them at 
many points, as for example in his view of the heart as the unifying 



220. From the Apophthegma!a Climacu.s derives his stories about Antony, Arsenius 
and others in 4 (717C). p. 114; 15 (HS.'iC, 8H9C, 8^20), pp. 175, 178, 179; 191V37D), p. 1V5; 
25(W7C), p. 225; 27 (111 2D), p. 27U; 29(1148CD), p. 283. He is also familiar with similar 
material in other early monastic texts: e.g. Pachomius, First (ireek Life {27 [1117A], p. 
273); Palladiu.s, The Lausiac History (24 [984C), p. 217; 25 [99/0, p. 225); John Moschus, 
The Spiritual Meadow (2fi [H)I6B1, p. 2.M); The Story of Thais (26 [1064C], p. 249). For de- 
tailed references, sec the relevant footnotes below, 

221. 14 (865 A), p. 166. 

222. See, for example, 4 (677D, 685 A), pp. 91. 95; 26 (102 IB, 1068B), pp. 2 35, 250; cf 
above, p. 12. But John nowhere use.s Evagriu,s' threefold scheme of praktiki, physiki 
("natural contemplation"), and theana of God. 

22 3. See below, pp. 62-66. Climacus seems to be familiar with the work attributed 
to Nilus, but probably written by Evagrius, On the liight Spirits of Wickedness {PG 79, 
! 145-64); also with another compilation circulating under the name of Nilus, On the 
f-Agbi I-k'tl Thoughts {PC 79, 1436-64), which is in fact a translation (in abbreviated form) 
from the Latin of St. John Cassian: see S. Marsili, "Resume de Cassien sous ie nom de 
saint Xil", fievue d'ascelique ct de mystique xv (1934), pp. 241-5. 

224. See above, p. 33. 

225. See above, p. 52. 



60 



INTRODUCTION 



center of the human person, body, soul and spirit,^^^ and in the pri- 
macy which he assigns to love. But he speaks far less than the Homilies 
do about the work of the Holy Spirit. 

The Ladder is of course by no means the earliest work in which 
there is to be found a convergence between the Evagrian and the Ma- 
carian approaches. A similar rapprochement is already evident in two 
fifth-century writers, St. Mark the Ascetic and St. Diadochus of Pho- 
tice. Even though John does not mention either of them by name, 
there can be little doubt that he is familiar with their writings. From 
Mark almost certainly he derives his analysis of temptation in Step 
15.^2' Points of resemblance between Diadochus and John include 
their teaching on the invocation or remembrance of Jesus; a cautious 
attitude towards dreams;^^* the distinction between the two forms of 
the withdrawal of God's grace — between the temporary and provi- 
dential abandonment permitted by God for our own good, and the far 
graver abandonment due to God's turning away from our sin;^'^^ and 
the belief that anger can be turned to good use.^^° 

In his treatment of the Jesus Prayer, John is probably influenced 
also by the school of Gaza (early sixth century) — by St. Varsanuphius, 
St. John the Prophet, and their disciple St. Dorotheus — but once 
again he does not mention them by name. His understanding of spiri- 
tual fatherhood seems likewise to be indebted to the school of Gaza; 
and his moderate use of Evagrian terminology, in a not very system- 
atic manner, resembles that found in Dorotheus. Another Palestinian 
writer, not explicitly cited, on whom John seems to draw is Abba Isa- 
ias (fifth century); both have similar views on what is "according to 
nature."^^' 



L 



226. See 28 (1 I40B), p. 281, quoted above, p. 53. Cf. 4 (700C), p. 103: the gateway of 
the heart, 7 (8()5A), p. 138; "Withdraw into your heart"; 15 (900C), p. !84: prayer of the 
liciirt; 28 (1 137B), p. 280: watching over the heart. 'Fhe phrase "perception {atsthisis) of 
the heart" occurs frequently. 

227. See below, pp. 182-3 (with the notes). Mark is also cited, but not by name, in 
J) (965D). p, 208. 

i» 228, 3 (669H-672B), pp. 89-90; cf. Diadochus, Cetittiry 36-38 {Phil., pp. 263-4). 

229. See 4 (7((8H), p. 108; 5 (7770, p. 129; 21 (948A), p. 200; 26 (l()fi9A), p. 252; and 
tn particular 7 (KHOJ, p 143; cf Diadochus, (.'eiitury Hf, {Phil., p. 2K6), using the same 
iiictiiiihcji of a inoiticr \»ilh herchikl. 

2111 26(ll(6Ml)), p, 251, cf Diadochus, Cenliiry 62 {Phil., p. 272). 

2.)l. 26 (I068(:D), |). 251; cf. Isaias, Di.seoiirte ii: eil. Av^jouslinos ( |iTHMilcin |9| I), 
pp. 4^A; Hcc also Phil , |). 22. 



61 



INTRODUCTION 



Writers to whom John does refer by name include Origen (men- 
tioned once, with disapprovalX^-*^ St. Gregory of Nazianzus, the 
"Theologian" (cited several times),^^-'' St. John Cassian^-''* and St. 
Ephraim the Syrian^-'^ (both cited once). He does not mention St. 
Dionysius the Areopagite, and it is not clear how far he is influenced 
by the Dionysian writings. 

The Classification of the Vices 

A particular problem arises over the classification of the vices in 
Steps 8-23 of The Ladder. Here, regarding blasphemy as a vice distinct 
from pride but treating sleepiness as an aspect of insensitivity, we 
have a list of fourteen vices. It is not at first sight clear how to relate 
this to the more usual list of eight "evil thoughts" found in Eva- 
grius;^^'' 

gluttony 

lust 

avarice 

dejection (lypi) 

anger 

despondency (akidia) 

vainglory 

pride 

The order in which Evagrius lists the vices is deliberate. It reflects, 
first, the general development of the spiritual life: beginners contend 
against the grosser and more materialistic sins (gluttony, lust, ava- 
rice); those in the middle of the journey are confronted by the more 
inward temptations of discouragement and irritability (dejection, an- 



2 32. .'i (7S0D), p. 131. 

233. \'i (880C), note 64, p. 17); 22 (94yA), p. 201 — but this is possibly a reference to 
Pope Gregory the Great (see below, note 246); 26 (1064.^), p. 24H; 28 (1 1 37C), p. 280. 

234. 4 (71 7B), p. 114. For Climacus' debt to Cassian, and al.so for the manner in 
which he transforms what he borrows, see Archimandrite Sophrony, "De la necessitc 
des trois renoncements chez St. Cassien le Romain et St, Jean Climaque", Studia Putrti- 
tka V {.Texte und Vntersuchungen 80: Berlin 1962), pp. 393-40(1. 

235. 29(114aD), p. 283, cited simply as "the Syrian." 

236. On the Eight Thoughts, 1 {PG 40, 1272A). Evagrius is probably drawing upon 
Origen: see I. Hausherr, "L'origine de la theorie orientale des huit peches capitaux", 
Orientalia Christiana xxx, no. 86 (Rome 193 3), pp. 164-75. 



62 



INTRODUCTION 



ger, despondency); the more advanced, already initiated into contem- 
plation, still need to guard themselves against the most subtle and 
"spiritual" of the vices, vainglory and pride, Secondly, the list of 
eight vices reflects the threefold division of the human person into 
the appetitive, the incensive and the intelligent aspect (epithymitikon, 
thymikon, logikon).'^^'' Gluttony, lust and avarice are more especially 
linked with the appetitive aspect; dejection, anger and despondency, 
with the incensive power; vainglory and pride, with the intelligent 
aspect. ^^* 

Evagrius' disciple, St. John Cassian, transmitted this list of the 
eight "thoughts" to the West, but made one change in the sequence: 
to make more evident the connection between dejection and despon- 
dency, he moved anger up to the fourth place, after avarice.^^^ Fur- 
ther changes were made by St. Gregory the Great, Pope of Rome 
(."190-604), known in the East as "Gregory the Dialogist." He set pride 
in a class on its own, as the source and mother of all other vices, and 
omitted dejection, regarding this as the same as despondency, while 
adding envy to the list. In this way he produced the catalogue of the 
"seven deadly sins," familiar to the Western Middle Ages:^''° 



inanis gloria (vainglory) 

invidia (envy) 

ira (anger) 

tristitia (dejection) 

avaritia (avarice) 

ventris ingluvies (gluttony) 

luxuria (lust) 



237. On this threefold division, see the note in Phi!., pp. 357-8, First formulated by 
I'lato (sec Rcpuhiic, Book iv, 434D-441C), it is widely used by the Fathers: Evagrius, 
I'taclicus >i'> (ed. A. fiuillaumont. Sources chretiennes 171 [Paris 1971], pp. 680-9), says that 
he has taken it from Gregory of Na^.ian/.us (.see his Poems, 11, i, 47: PG 37, 1381A- 
1 '84A). rOr Cilimacus' use of the Platonic scheme, .see for example Past. 15 (1205B), p. 
2-19. 

238 1 he vices arc cxjilicitly linked with the three aspects of the .soul in John (!as- 
lltfii, ( Miifcivnccf Ksiv, 1 5; Cussiiin gives a list of eighteen vices in all, including :ill cighi 
from ihc l'',vagrian lisl. Oonilleau, US viii, col. 377, a.ssimilates Climacus' lis! to ihat of 
(iild.iiiin, bu( ihc correspnndcnce is by no means exact. 

2Jy. Sec Institutes, IJiHiks v-xii. 
? 24(), Moralia xxxi, 87 (/'/. 76, 621). 



rt3 



INTRODUCTION 



St. John Climacus does not follow any of these schemes exactly. 
He points out that sin, being by its very nature disordered and amor- 
phous, cannot be classified with precision.^*' He is familiar with the 
eightfold scheme of Evagrius,^*^ and like Evagrius he sometimes 
makes a distinction between the three chief sins of gluttony, vainglo- 
ry and avarice, and the remaining five which spring from them.^"*^ 
But, alongside this eightfold scheme, John is also familiar with a se- 
venfold scheme, for which he expresses a preference: this treats vain- 
glory and pride as a single vice.^** In practice, however, he usually 
distinguishes between the two, discussing them separately in Steps 22 
and 23; on the other hand he commonly omits dejection or gloom 
(lypi) from his list,^'*^ presumably because like Pope Gregory he con- 
siders this identical with despondency (akidia); and so, after all, he 
ends up with the number seven (for he omits envy, which figures on 
Gregory's list).^*^ Thus in Step 29 he gives the following list:^*^ 



gluttony 

lechery (lust) 

cupidity (avarice) 

despondency 

anger 

vainglory 

pride 



241. 26(in2lD). p. 23.1, 

242. 1.! (HM)C), p. 163: 17 (929B), p. 190, 

243. 17 <92yB), p. IVO; 26 (1013.\, 1()21C), pp. 229, 23.1, For a somewhat different 
di.stinction lietueen the five and the three, see 27 (1 109A), p. 267. 

244. 22 ('MHD-V4VA), p. 201. 

24.5, Lypi is mentioned, however, in the list of the passions that assail the monk at 
different times of the day; 27 (1 1 12C), p. 269. 

246, Was Climacus aware of Pope Gregory's list? In 22 (949A), p. 201, when men- 
tioning the sevenfold scheme as distinguished from the eightfold, he refers to "Gregor\ 
the Theologian" as one of those who prefer to reckon the vices as seven in number. 
Normally this would mean Gregory of Na?,ianzus; but I know of no such teaching in 
his works. John may therefore mean Pope Gregory; perhaps "Theologos" is a scribal 
error for "Dialogos" (cf. Couilleau, liS viii, col. 376). But John's list is not the same as 
Gregory the Great's: for, although both leave out dejection, John retains pride as one of 
the seven, and does not include envy. 

247. 29(1149AB), pp. 283-4. 



64 



INTRODUCTION 



Apart from the fact that dejection is omitted and that despondency 
precedes anger, these are the same as the eight "evil thoughts" of Eva- 
grius, and are given in the same order. 

In Steps 8-23, however, John expands Evagrius' list by adding 
seven further vices, dependent on the primary seven. In his list of the 
primary seven he follows Evagrius, except that he omits dejection; 
but he moves anger and despondency up to the beginning, thus plac- 
ing the vices of the soul's incensive aspect before those of its appeti- 
tive aspect: 



Evagrius 



gluttony 

lust 

avarice 

dejection 

anger 

despondency 

vainglory 

pride 



Climacus 

anger 

despondency 

gluttony 

lust 

avarice 



vainglory 
pride 



)ohn is normally careful, in Steps 8-23, to point out how the depen- 
dent vices are linked with the primary seven: just as the virtues form 
a ladder, so the vices form a chain, ^^^ in detail his scheme takes this 
form: 



anger (8) 



dependen t vices: m a 1 i c e (9) 



248, 9(«4()D-841A). p, 152. Thus: 

anger leads ro malice: 9 (841 A), p. 1.14; 
malice leads to slander: 10 (B4.1B), p, 15.1; 
slander leads lo talkativeness: 1 1 (S.12A), p, 158: 
lalkaliveness leads to (1) falsehood: 12 (K53D), p, 160; 

(2) despondency: 13 (857D), p. 162; 
dcsporulcTH-y leads to liisl: 26 (1 1()9|», p. KM; 
gluttony leads 1o(l) lust 

(2) in.sensitiviiy; 14 (H69D), p. 17(1; I7('>29|i), p, [9(1. 
insensitivily ("unbelief") and vainglory lead lo fear: 2! (94 1H), p 199, 
vainglory leads to pride: 22 (94VA), p. 201; 
pride leiid.s to blasphemy: 2 3 (976Fi), p. 211. 



65 



INTRODUCTION 



INTRODUCTION 



slander (10) 
talkativeness (11) 
falsehood (12) 



despondency (13) 
gluttony (14) 
lust (15) 
avarice (16) 



vainglory (22) 
pride (2 J) 



dependent vices: 



dependent vice: 



insensitivity (18) 
fear (21) 



blasphemy (23) 



John's classification of the vices, drawing as it does upon earlier 
authorities yet adhering slavishly to none of them, illustrates the way 
in which he combines tradition and personal originality in The Ladder. 
What he borrows he makes his own. 

The Influence of The Ladder " ' 

Why should The Ladder of Divine Ascent have proved so remark- 
ably popular?^*^ Partly, no doubt, because of the striking symbol of 
the ladder, which binds together the whole book, and has caught the 
imagination of innumerable readers. More fundamentally, its popu- 
larity is surely due to the author's combination of shrewdness and hu- 
mor, to his skill in drawing so many themes into a single synthesis, 
and above all to the depth of his spiritual insight. 

The wide diffusion of The Ladder is reflected by the large number 
of surviving manuscripts, sometimes illustrated, and often including 
scholia or commentaries. ^^^ The respect felt for its author is evident 
from the unusual prominence that he enjoys in the ecclesiastical year. 
Besides having in the normal way an annual commemoration on 
March 30 in the calendar of fixed feasts, he is also commemorated on 
the fourth Sunday in Lent, and most of the liturgical texts on that day 
refer to him.^^' This Sunday commemoration in the Great Fasi 



249. On the influence of The Ladder, see M. Heppell, introduction to The Ladder iif 
Divine Ascent, ET Archimandrite Lazarus, pp. 25-31-, Couilleau, AAV viii, col.s. 3tl2-S. 

250. Some of these scholia appear in Rader's edition, and are reprinted in PC HN. 

251. See The Lenten Triodton, ET Mother Mary and Archimandrite Kallistos \\';i\r 
(London 1978), pp. 353-67. 



66 



marks John Climacus out as the ascetic author par excellence, whose 
writings provide a standard and model for the whole Church. As al- 
ready mentioned, The Ladder is appointed to be read in Orthodox 
monasteries each year during Lent. 

St. John Climacus' influence on later spiritual writers has been 
extensive. At Sinai itself his teaching on prayer and inward stillness 
was developed by Hesychius (Peighth-ninth century) and Philotheus 
(?ninth-tenth century). The first of these, in his work On Watchfulness 
and Holiness, takes up the scattered allusions in The Ladder to the Jesus 
Prayer and the invocation or remembrance of Jesus, and makes this 
his dominant theme. Although surprisingly The Ladder is nowhere 
cited in the vast eleventh-century anthology entitled Evergetinos, it 
was certainly read and valued by St. Symeon the New Theologian. 
Nicetas Stethatos, Symeon's biographer, recounts how, on a visit to 
his family home shortly before his profession as a monk, Symeon 
found the book in his father's library: "and, becoming closely familiar 
with it, like good earth he accepted the seed of the word in his 
heart."'^^^ y^^. J^addefs influence can be seenjn particular in Symeon's 
teaching on the gift of tears, and in his picture of the spiritual father 
in the Discourse on Confession. 

St. Peter of Damascus (twelfth century) quotes The Ladder at least 
thirteen times, and the fourteenth-century Hesychasts draw heavily 
upon it. There are thirteen citations from The Ladder in St. Gregory 
of Sinai — far more than from any other author — and, in his list of 
Writers approved for monastic reading, Gregory puts first the name 
of John Climacus. ^^^ In the Triads in Defense of the Holy Hesychasts by 
St. Gregory Palamas, The Ladder is quoted some twenty-five times, 
>nd in the Century of St. Kallistos and St. Ignatios Xanthopoulos more 
than thirty times. The parts of The Ladder to which these fourteenth- 
century writers chiefly refer are Step 27 on hesychia and John's state- 
ments on the invocation of the name of Jesus. 

'The Ladder was soon translated into the other languages of the 
Christian Fast: into Syriac before the end of the seventh century. 



1$1. Life of St. Symeon the New Theologian 6 (ed. I. Hausherr, Orienlalia Christiana xli. 
pt), 4< I Rome Ii>2M|, p. 12): Synicun wa.s particularly helped by Siep 13. 'I'l-ie Ladder is 
Cilrd twice- in Symeon's Caleeheses 14, lines 540-2; 30, lino 141), jltlioii^;!) tioi ii|ipiirriilly 
Jtl his nilu-i- wiiiinns, liui Synifuti hardly ever nisikes explit-it ciiaiions (r nhvr wrir- 

•n. 

Hi. Ihi Sltllnm am! the Ivo .\U-lhmts o/' I'niyer I I l/Y, 1 51), | !>4))) 



67 



INTRODUCTION 



within a few decades of John's death; into Arabic and Georgian by 
the tenth century, and also into Armenian; into Slavonic by the tenth 
century, and into Romanian early in the seventeenth century. Its in- 
fluence in fifteenth-century Russia can be seen both upon the leader 
of the Non-Possessors, St. Nil Sorskii, and upon his chief opponent 
among the Possessors, St. Joseph of Volokalamsk. In the correspon- 
dence of Tsar Ivan IV, often styled "the Terrible," next to the Holy 
Scriptures the book most often quoted is The Ladder.^^* The anony- 
mous Russian Pilgrim, in the middle of the nineteenth century, is also 
familiar with the work.^^' 

In the West a first translation in Latin, perhaps only partial, was 
made in the eleventh century; a second version was made in the thir- 
teenth or early fourteenth century by the Franciscan "spiritual" of 
the Strict Observance, Angelas Clarenus.^^^ The first English trans- 
lation appeared in 1858, the second in 1959 (revised edition, 1978);^^' 
the present English rendering, in the series The Classics of Western 
Spirituality, is thus the third. 

"Ascend, my brothers, ascend eagerly. "^^^ The Ladder of St. John 
Climacus grew out of its author's living experience, and it requires 
from each reader a living, personal response. Read hastily, in a spirit 
of detached curiosity, the book is likely to prove a disappointment. 
But John never meant it to be read in that manner. He expected it to 
be pondered slowly, in a spirit of compunction, and with a sincere in- 
tention on the reader's part to change his way of life; and if the book 
has proved deeply influential, that is because so many have read it in 
precisely such a way, applying the words personally to their own sit- 
uation. This is a ladder that we must each ascend for ourselves. 

Bibliographical Note 

(I) The Greek Text. There exists as yet no fully critical edition of 
the Greek text of The Ladder and To the Shepherd. The Greek is at pres- 
ent available in two independent editions: 

(i) By Matthew Rader (Paris 1633). Twice reprinted: 
(a) J.-P. Migne, PG 88 (Paris 1864), cols. 632-1208. 



2.^4. See HTM, p. xxvii. 

255. The Way of a Pilgrim, ET R.M. French (London 1954), pp. 80, 82, 143, 191, 227 

256. See J. Gribomont, "La Scala Paradisi, Jean de Ra'ithou et Ange Clareno", i'lu- 
diii Afonastica ii (1960), pp. 345-58. 

257. For details, see below, "Bibliographical Note." 

258. Brief Summary (1161 A), p. 291. 



68 



INTRODUCTION 



(b) P. Trevisan, Corona Patrum Salesiana, series graeca 8-9 {2 
vols., Turin 1941); includes some minor corrections of (a). 

(ii) By the hermit Sophronios, monk of the Holy Mountain 
(Constantinople 1883); often superior to the text of Rader-Migne. 

(II) English Translations. 

(i) Father Robert, Monk of Mount St. Bernard's Abbey (Leices- 
tershire, England), The Holy Ladder of Perfection, by which we may ascend 
to heaven (London 1858). Often more a paraphrase than an exact ren- 
dering. Omits most of Step 27 on stillness: "this Degree," says Father 
Robert, "as chiefly appertaining to solitaries, has been abridged by 
the translator" (p. 392). 

(ii) Archimandrite Lazarus (Moore), The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 
with an introduction by M. Heppell (London 1959). Far more accu- 
rate than (i). Reissued in revised form by the Holy Transfiguration 
Monastery (Boston, Massachusetts 1978); this reissue includes, besides 
The Ladder, the work To the Shepherd (omitted in the 1858 and 1959 
translations). As well as using the different printed editions of the 
Greek, the revisers consulted the ninth-century Sinai manuscript no. 
421; but regrettably the helpful introduction by Dr. Heppell has been 
omitted. 

(III) Studies. For a short but balanced survey of Climacus' life and 
teaching, with bibliography, see G. Couilleau, DS viii (Paris 1972), 
cols. 369-89. 

Consult also: 

M.O. Sumner, St. fohn Climacus: the Psychology of the Desert Fathers 
(The Guild of Pastoral Psychology, Guild Lecture no. 63: London 
1950) (an attempt to understand Climacus in terms of Jungian analyt- 
ical psychology; too brief to be fully convincing, but indicates an im- 
portant field for further research). 

J.R. Vlartin, The Illustration of the Heavenly Ladder of John Climacus 
(Studies in Manuscript Illumination 5: Princeton 1954) (on illustrated 
manuscripts of The Ladder). 

I. Hausherr, "La theologie du monachisme chez saint Jean Clima- 
que", in the collective volume Theologie de la vie monastique (Paris 
1961), pp. 3 K 5-4 10. 

W. V'olker, Scala Paradisi. Eine Studie zu Johannes Climacus und zug- 
leich eine I'orstudie zu Symeon dem Neuen Tbeologen (Wiesbaden 1968) (the 
fullest and most systematic existing study). 

I). Ilogdanovic, _/(■«« (Jimaquv dans la littcrature hyzamuw it In hi 
Ihature serhc ancienne (Institut d'Ltudcs Byzantines, Moiioyruphir*, 



69 



INIRODUCTION 



Fascicule 11: Belgrade 1968) {in Serbo-Croat, with summary in 
French on pp. 215-25; important). 

C Yannaras, "Eros divin et eros humain selon S. Jean Clima- 
que", Contacts xxi (1969), pp. 190-204. 

C. Yannaras, / metaphysiki tou somatos, Spoudi ston loanni tis Klima- 
kos [The metaphysics of the body. A study of John Climacus] (Athens 1971) 
(helpful discussion of the body, eros and dispassion). 

I have not been able to consult the unpublished Ph.D. disserta- 
tion of T.W. Blair, Climacus and Christianity. A Study of the Effects of 
John Climacus' Conceptual Commitments on his Perception of Christianity 
(Duke University 1977). 

On monastic life in the Sinai peninsula, see H. Skrobucha, Sinai 
(London 1966), pp. 19^7; D.J. Chitty, The Desert a City (Oxford 1966), 
pp. 168-78 (scholarly and perceptive). 

Bishop Kallistos 
Lianfilo 

Commemoration of the Holy Prophet Moses 
4/17 September 1980 



70 



JohiuClimacus 

THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 




RnUAUTY 



Step 1 



ON RENUNCIATION OF LIFE 



When writing to the servants of God,, one should begin with our 
God and King Himself, the good, the supremely good, the all-good. 
Of all created and rational beings, endowed with the dignity of free 
will, some are friends of God, some are His true servants, some are 
useless servants (cf. Luke 17:10), some are entirely estranged, and 
there are some who, for all their weakness, take their stand against 
Him. We simple people assume that His friends, O holy Father, are 
properly speaking those intelligent and bodiless beings who surround 
Him. His true servants are all those who have done and are doing His 
will without hesitation or pause. His useless servants are those who 
think of themselves as having been worthy of the gift of baptism, but 
have not at ail guarded their covenant with Him; while, it seems to 
us, the strangers from God, His opponents, are the unbelievers or 
heretics. His enemies are those who not only contravene and repudi- 
ate the commands of the Lord, but make stern war against all who 
obey Him. 

Each of the above has his own special character and is deserving 
of fitting analysis. But for ignorant people like ourselves there is 
nothing to be gained by investigating these now. So, then, with un- 
questioning obedience let us reach out our unworthy hand to the true 
servants of God, to those who devoutly urge us on and in faith com 
pel us by their commands. Let us make a treatise, with their kiiowl 
edge as the implement of writing, a pen dipped in their subdued yri 



7.1 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



glorious humility, applied to the smooth white parchments of their 
hearts, or rather resting on the tablets of the spirit. Let us write on it 
divine words, or rather seeds,' and let us begin like this. 

God is the life of all free beings. He is the salvation of all, of be- 
lievers or unbelievers, of the just or the unjust, of the pious or the im- 
pious, of those freed from the passions or caught up in them, of 
monks or those living in the world, of the educated or the illiterate, of 
the healthy or the sick, of the young or the very old. He is like the 
outpouring of light, the glimpse of the sun, or the changes of the 
weather, which are the same for everyone without exception. "For 
God is no respecter of persons" (Rom. 2:1 1). An impious man is a ra- 
tional being, one that must die, who willingly runs away from life, 
and refuses to believe in the existence of his own everlasting Creator. 
A transgressor is someone who observes the divine law only in his 
own depraved fashion and holds on to heretical belief in opposition to 
God. A Christian is an imitator of Christ in thought, word and deed, 
as far as this is humanly possible, and he believes rightly and blame- 
lessly in the Holy Trinity. A friend of God is the one who lives in 
communion with all that is natural and free from sin and who does 
not neglect to do what good he can. The self-controlled man strives 
with all his might amidst the trials, the snares, and the noise of the 
world, to be like someone who rises above them. The monk finds 
himself in an earthly and defiled body, but pushes himself into the 
rank and status of the incorporeal angels. The monk clings only to the 
commandments and words of God in every season and place and mat- 
ter. The monk is ever embattled with what he is, and he is the unfail- 
ing warder of his senses. The monk has a body made holy, a tongue 
purified, a mind enlightened. Asleep or awake, the monk is a soul 
pained by the constant remembrance of death. Withdrawal from the 
world is a willing hatred of all that is materially prized, a denial of 
nature for the sake of what is above nature. 

. All this is done by those who willingly turn from the things of 
this life, either for the sake of the coming kingdom, or because of the 
number of their sins, or on account of their love of God. Without 
such objectives the denial of the world would make no sense. God 
who judges the contest stands waiting to see how it ends for the one 
who has taken on this race. 

The man turning away from the world in order to shake off the 



1. The phrase "or rather seeds" only occurs in some texts. 



74 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



burden of his sins should imitate those who sit by the tombs outside 
the city. Let him not desist from ardent raging tears, from the word- 
less moans of the heart, until he sees Jesus Himself coming to roll 
back the rock of hardness^ off him, to free the mind, that Lazarus of 
ours, from the bonds of sin, to say to His ministering angels, "Loose 
him from his passions and let him go to blessed dispassion."-'' If it is 
not done thus, then it is all for nothing. 

Those of us who wish to get away from Egypt, to escape from 
Pharaoh, need some Moses to be our intermediary with God, to stand 
between action and contemplation, and stretch out his arms to God, 
that those led by him may cross the sea of sin and put to flight the 
Amaiek of the passions.* Those who have given themselves up to God 
but imagine that they can go forward without a leader are surely de- 
ceiving themselves. The fugitives from Egypt had Moses, while those 
escaping from Sodom had an angel for a leader. The former are like 
those who heal the passions of the soul by the care of doctors; they are 
the ones who have come out of Egypt. The latter long to shed the un- 
cleanness of the wretched body, for which ceason they need an angel 
or the help of some like being. We must have someone very skilled, a 
doctor, for our septic wounds. 

Violence (cf. Matt. 11:12) and unending pain are the lot of those 
who aim to ascend to heaven with the body, and this especially at the 
early stages of the enterprise, when our pleasure-loving disposition 
and our unfeeling hearts must travel through overwhelming grief 
toward the love of God and holiness. It is hard, truly hard. There has 
to be an abundance of invisible bitterness, especially for the careless, 
until our mind, that cur sniffing around the meat market and revel- 
ling in the uproar, is brought through simplicity, deep freedom from 
anger and diligence to a love of holiness and guidance. Yet full of pas- 



2. GK poroseos. Rader's text has /Jjrowoj-, "of burning." 

i. Throughout this work "dispassion" translates the Gk apatheia. For St. John Cli- 
rnaeus dispassion is the denial of the passions, not merely in a negative way by ascetic 
discipHne, but by redirecting the natural impulses of the soul and body toward their 
proper goal. See the Preface, p. 32. 

4. John is referring to Exod. 17:11-13 and applying to it an allegorical interpreta- 
tion. In the battle against the Amalekites (the passions) the Israelites (souls under a 
.spiritual director) prevailed as long as the arms of Moses (the guide) were held raisfil in 
prayer by Hur (action) on one side and Aaron (contemplation) on the other. Aciiiin 
(praxi!) is the ascetic struggle to practice the virtues and overcome the ]>assion.s. Il \s ihr 
necessary foundation for contemplation Uhcoiiu), which is ihe direcl afipri-lHMHiim oi 
vision oi Ciod by the intellect. 



75 



JOHN CI.IMACUS 



sions and weakness as wc iirc, Ici iis talic hcnri .iiui let us in total con- 
fidence carry to C^hiisi in our n^-ht liniul aiul oinCoss to Him our 
helf>le.ssness and our fragility. Wc will carry away more help than we 
deserve, if only we constantly push ourselves down into the depths of 
humility. 

Let all those coming to this marvelous, tough, and painful — 
though also easy — contest leap, as it were, into a fire, so that a non- 
material flame may take up residence within ilieni. Hut let each one 
test himself, draw food and drink from the bread of pain and the cup 
of weeping, lest he march himself to judgment. 

If all are not saved who have been baptized, 1 will pass in silence 
over what follows.^ 

But to secure a rocklike foundation, those with a mind for the re- 
ligious life will turn away from everything, will despise everything, 
will ridicule everything, will shake off everything. Innocence, absti- 
nence, temperance — these make a fine thrice-firm foundation. Let all 
infants in Christ begin with these, taking real infants as their exam- 
ple; for among children no evil is found, nothing deceitful, no insatia- 
ble greed or gluttony, no flaming lust, but it seems that as you feed 
them more, they grow in strength until at last they come upon pas- 
sion. 

It is detestable and dangerous for a wrestler to be slack at the 
start of a contest, thereby giving proof of his impending defeat to ev- 
eryone. Let us have a firm beginning to our religious life, for this will 
help us if a certain slackness comes later. A bold and eager soul will 
be spurred on by the memory of its first zeal and new wings can thus 
be obtained. 

When the soul betrays itself, when that initial happy warmth 
grows cold, the reasons for such a loss ought to be carefully sought 
and, once found, ought to be combated with all possible zeal, for the 
initial fervor has to turn back through that same gate through which 
it had slipped away. The man who renounces the world because of 
fear is like burning incense, which begins with fragrance and ends in 
smoke. The man who leaves the world in hopes of a reward is like the 
millstone that always turns around on the same axis. But the man 
who leaves the world for love of God has taken fire from the start, 
and like fire set to fuel, it soon creates a conflagration. 



i. I.e., if not all the hapti/.cd are saved, not all monks will reach their goal. 



76 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



Some people when they build a house place bricks on top of 
rocks. Others raise columns up from the ground, Others still, when 
taking a walk, go slowly for a while, thus giving sinews and joints a 
warming up, and then stride out vigorously. Let the perceptive mind 
understand this analogy. Let us run our race eagerly as if summoned 
to it by our God and King. Our time is short. Let us not be found 
barren on the day of death and perish of hunger. Instead let us please 
the Lord as soldiers please the emperor; for at the end of the cam- 
paign we must give a good account of ourselves. We should be afraid 
of God in the way we fear wild beasts. I have seen men go out to 
plunder, having no fear of God but being brought up short some- 
where at the sound of dogs, an effect that fear of God could not 
achieve in them. 

We should love the Lord as we do our friends. Many a time I 
have seen people bring grief to God, without being bothered about it, 
and I have seen these very same people resort to every device, plan, 
pressure, plea from themselves and their friends, and every gift, sim- 
ply to restore an old relationship upset by s6me minor grievance. 

At the beginning of our religious life, we cultivate the virtues, 
and we do so with toil and difficulty. Progressing a little, we then lose 
our sense of grief or retain very little of it. But when our mortal intel- 
ligence turns to zeal and is mastered by it, then we work with full joy, 
determination, desire, and a holy flame. 

All praise to those who from the beginning keep the command- 
ments of God, and do so gladly and eagerly; and greatly to be pitied 
are those who after a long time in the ascetic life still keep them with 
great labor if they keep them at all. And let us not be horrified at or 
judge harshly those who renounce the religious life because of exter- 
nal circumstances. I have seen some men run away and accidentally 
meet the emperor, tarry with him, go to live in his palace, and take 
food with him. I have watched seed that accidentally fell into the 
ground bear much fruit again and again, though the opposite has also 
happened. I have seen someone go to a doctor for one kind of prob- 
lem, and, because of that doctor's skill, be treated with an astringent 
and be cured of failing eyesight, for it often happens that very defi- 
nite and lasting results emerge through chance rather than through 
the workings of prescience and planning. So let no one tell me that he 
is unfit for the monastic life because of the weight and number of his 
misdeeds, or that because of his addiction to pleasure he nuisl he ex- 
cused for remaining stuck in his sin. The more the puircliKlinti, (hs 



77 



JOHNCMMACUS 



greater the need for treat ineiii, if Mic iinclcanness is to be done away 
witli, for ihf healthy do not make ihcii' way to the doctor's surgery. 

In this world when an enipcror siimiiions us to obedience, we 
leave everything aside and answer the call at once without delays or 
hanging back or excuses. We had lieiter be careful then not to refuse, 
through laziness or inertia, the call lo the heavenly life in the service 
of the King of kings, the Lord of lords, the God of gods. Let us not 
find ourselves unable to defend ourselves at the great tribunal of 
judgment. Someone caught up in the affairs of the world can make 
progress, if he is determined. But it is not easy. Those bearing chains 
can still walk. But they often stumble and are thereby injured. The 
man who is unmarried and in the world, for all that he may be bur- 
dened, can nevertheless make haste toward the monastic life. But the 
married man is like someone chained hand and foot.^ 

Some people living carelessly in the world put a question to me: 
"How can we who are married and living amid public cares aspire to 
the monastic life?" 

I answered: "Do whatever good you may. Speak evil of no one. 
Rob no one. Tell no lie. Despise no one and carry no hate. Do not 
separate yourself from the church assemblies.'^ Show compassion to 
the needy. Do not be a cause of scandal to anyone. Stay away from the 
bed of another, and be satisfied with what your own wives can pro- 
vide you. If you do all this, you will not be far from the kingdom of 
heaven." 

Let us hasten with joy and trepidation to the noble contest and 
with no fear of our enemies. They are themselves unseen but they can 
look at the appearance of our soul. If they are really to see our spirits 
bowed down by fear, then indeed they will make a harsher sally 
against us, knowing how much we tremble. Let us courageously arm 
ourselves against them. No one goes to battle against a plucky fighter. 

The Lord has wisely eased the struggles of novices, lest they be 
driven back into the world during their first battles. So then rejoice 
always in the Lord, all you servants of God. Recognize this first sign 
of the Lord's love. It is He Who has summoned you. He has often 
been known to act in the following way: when He sees courageous 



6. Some versions add; "so when he wants to run he cannot." 

7. Gk ton synaxeon. The synaxis was an assembly in church for the Office or ihc 
Eucharist. Here lay people are being told that they must not be absent from the u cekh- 
celebration of the Eucharist. 



78 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



souls He permits them to be embattled from the very beginning, in 
order the sooner to reward them. 

The Lord has concealed from those in the world the tough, but 
fine, nature of this struggle. Indeed, if people really understood it, no 
one would renounce the world. Still, offer your labors gladly to 
Christ in your youth and He will make your old age happy with 
abundant goodness.^ The things which they have gathered in their 
youth will come to the support and encouragement of those worn 
down by age, so we should toil zealously when we are young and run 
our course with serious hearts. Death can come at any time, and we 
have countless hidden enemies — evil enemies, harsh, deceitful, wick- 
ed enemies with fire in their hands, wishing to set the Lord's temple 
alight with the flame that is in it. These enemies are powerful, un- 
sleeping, incorporeal and unseen. No novice should heed the devilish 
words of his foes as they murmur: "Do not wear out your body, in 
case you fall prey to disease and weakness." Hardly anyone can be 
found in this day and age willing to bring low the body, although 
they may deny it the pleasure of abundant food. The aim of this de- 
mon is to make our entrance into the stadium weak and lethargic, and 
a fitting end will follow this beginning. 

The real servants of Christ, using the help of spiritual fathers and 
also their own self-understanding, will make every effort to select a 
place, a way of life, an abode, and the exercises that suit them. Com- 
munity life is not for everyone, because of gluttonous tendencies, and 
the solitary life is not for everybody, on account of the tendency to 
anger. Let each seek out the most appropriate way. 

All monastic life may be said to take one of three forms. There is 
the road of withdrawal and solitude for the spiritual athlete; there is 
the life of stillness' shared with one or two others; there is the prac- 
tice of living patiently in community. "Turn neither to right nor 
left," says Ecclesiastes (Prov. 4:27) but rather follow the royal way. 
The second of the three ways is said to be suitable for many people. 



H. Gk agatheias, a haj>ax tegninevon; the HTM reading is "dispa.ssion," apalheias. 

9. Stillness (hesychia) is a deep interior peace attained by those who practice (he 
constant remembrance of God. It is the subject of Step 27. Although stillness is not im- 
possible for monks living in community, solitude or near solitude is most conducive lo 
it. According to the context, therefore, hesychia is sometimes translaied as "solitude- *' 
Stillness is equivalent to contemplation, for "he who has achieved silliness Ini^ urciwil 
at the very center r>f ihc mysteries" <27 1 1 IlllX :|, p. 2Ci4). See the I'rcfiHT, pp Ml < I 



79 



JOHN CUMACUS 



"Woe to the man living ;ilonc wiicii he fulls into despondency'" or 
sleepiness, carelessness or despair, lor then he has no one among men 
to lift him up." This is what Fxclesiasies says (Fxcles. 4:10), and the 
Lord says: "Where two or three are gathered together in My name, I 
am there among them" (Matt. 18:20). 

Who, then, is the faithful and wise monk? It is the man who has 
kept unquenched the warmth of his vocation, who adds fire each day 
to fire, fervor to fervor, zeal to zeal, love to love, and this to the end of 
his life. 

This is the first step. Let him who has set foot on it not turn 
back. 



10. Desp>ondency (akidia) is a listlessness or torpor — "accidie" — that affliOii i 
monk when he relaxes his struggle to attain the virtues. It begins as a loss of a stnsc of 
purpose and ends in despair and spiritual death. See Step 13. 



80 



Step 2 



ON DETACHMENT 



If you truly love God and long to reach the kingdom that is to 
come, if you are truly pained by your failings and are mindful of pun- 
ishment and of the eternal judgment, if you are truly afraid to die, 
then it will not be possible to have an attachment, or anxiety, or con- 
cern for money, for possessions, for family relationships, for worldly 
glory, for love and brotherhood, indeed for anything of earth. All 
worry about one's condition, even for one's body, will be pushed 
aside as hateful. Stripped of all thought of these, caring nothing about 
them, one will turn freely to Christ. One will look to heaven and to 
the help coming from there, as in the scriptural sayings: "I will cling 
close to you" (Ps. 62:9) and "I have not grown tired of following you 
nor have I longed for the day or the rest that man gives" (Jer. 17:16). 

It would be a very great disgrace to leave everything after we 
have been called — and called by God, not man — and then to be wor- 
ried about something that can do us no good in the hour of our need, 
that is, of our death. This is what the Lord meant when He told us 
not to turn back and not to be found useless for the kingdom of heav- 
en. He knew how weak we could be at the start of our religious life, 
how easily we can turn back to the world when we associate with 
worldly people or happen to meet them. That is why it happened that 
when someone said to Him, "Let me go away to bury my failu-r," I Ic 
answered, "Let the dead bury the dead" (Matt. H:22). Ihcrf urc tic- 



81 



JOHN CIJMACUS 



mons to assail us after our irnmuini mn ol ihc world. They make us 
envy those who remain on the ouiside mul u ho arc merciful and com- 
passionate. They make us regret that ue seem deprived of these vir- 
tues. Their hostile aim is to bring us hy way of false humility either to 
turn back to the world or, if we remain monks, to plunge down the 
cliffs of despair. 

Conceit may lead us to disparage the secular life or secretly to de- 
spise those on the outside. We may act in this way in order to escape 
despair or to obtain hope. We should therefore heed the Lord when 
speaking to the young man who kept almost all the commandments: 
"You need one thing, to sell what you have and to give it to the poor" 
(Mark 10:21), for by making himself a pauper the young man would 
learn to accept the charity of others. 

If we really wish to enter the contest of religious life, we should 
pay careful heed to the sense in which the Lord described those re- 
maining in the world as living corpses (Matt. 8:22). What he said was, 
in effect, "Let the living dead who are in the world bury those dead in 
the body." Riches did not prevent the young man from coming to re- 
ceive baptism, and it is quite wrong to say, as some do, that the Lord 
told him to dispose of his wealth so that he could be baptized. Let us 
be sure of this, and let us be satisfied with the promise of very great 
glory that goes with our vocation. We should investigate why those 
who have lived in the world, and have endured nightlong vigils, fast- 
ing, labors, and suffering, and then have withdrawn from their fel- 
lowmen to the monastic life, as if to a place of trial or an arena, no 
longer practice their former fake and spurious asceticism. I have seen 
many different plants of the virtues planted by them in the world, 
watered by vanity as if from an underground cesspool, made to shoot 
up by love of show, manured by praise, and yet they quickly withered 
when transplanted to desert soil, to where the world did not walk, 
that is, to where they were not manured with the foul-smelling water 
of vanity. The things that grow in water cannot bear fruit in dry and 
arid places. 

If someone has hated the world, he has run away from its misery; 
but if he has an attachment to visible things, then he is not yet 
cleansed of grief. For how can he avoid grief when he is deprived of 
something he loves? We need great vigilance in all things, but espe- 
cially in regard to what we have left behind. 

I have observed many men in the world assailed by anxiety, l>y 



82 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



worry, by the need to talk, by all-night watching, and I have seen 
them run away from the madness of their bodies. They turned to the 
monastic life with totally free hearts, and still were pitiably corrupted 
by the stirrings of the body. 

We should be careful in case it should happen to us that while 
talking of journeying along the narrow and hard road we may actual- 
ly wander onto the broad and wide highway. 

Mortification of the appetite, nightlong toil, a ration of water, a 
short measure of bread, the bitter cup of dishonor — these will show 
you the narrow way. Derided, mocked, jeered, you must accept the 
denial of your will. You must patiently endure opposition, suffer ne- 
glect without complaint, put up with violent arrogance. You must be 
ready for injustice, and not grieve when you are slandered; you must 
not be angered by contempt and you must show humility when you 
have been condemned. Happy are those who follow this road and 
avoid other highways. Theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 

No one can enter crowned into the heavenly bridechamber with- 
out first making the three renunciations. He has to turn away from 
worldly concerns, from men, from family; he must cut selfishness 
away; and thirdly, he must rebuff the vanity that follows obedience. 
"Go out from among them," says the Lord. "Go apart from them. Do 
not touch the uncleanness of the age" (2 Cor. 6:17). 

Who in the outside world has worked wonders, raised the dead, 
expelled demons? No one. Such deeds are done by monks. It is their 
reward. People in secular life cannot do these things, for, if they 
could, what then would be the point of ascetic practice and the soli- 
tary life? 

Whenever our feelings grow warm after our renunciation with 
the memories of parents and of brothers, that is all the work of de- 
mons, and we must take up the weapons of prayer against them. In- 
flamed by the thought of eternal fire, we must drive them out and 
quench that untimely glow in our hearts. If a man thinks himself im- 
mune to the allurement of something and yet grieves over its loss, he 
is only fooling himself. Young men who still feel strongly the urge 
for physical love and pleasure and yet who also want to take on the 
regime of a monastery must discipline themselves with every form of 
vigilance and prayer, avoiding all dangerous comfort, so that their 
last state may not be worse than their first. For those sailing the tides 
of spirituality know only too well that the religious life can lie ii hur 



83 



JOHN CI.IMACUS 



bor of salvation or a haven of dfstnitiion, and a pitiable sight indeed 
is the shipwreck in port of someone who hud safely mastered the 
ocean. 

This is the second step, and if you take it, then do as Lot did, not 
his wife, and flee. 



84 



Step 3 



ON EXILE 



There is such a thing as exile, an irrevocable renunciation of ev- 
erything in one's familiar surroundings that hinders one from attain- 
ing the ideal of holiness. Exile is a disciplined heart, unheralded 
wisdom, an unpublicized understanding, a hidden life, masked ideals. 
It is unseen meditation, the striving to be humble, a wish for poverty, 
the longing for what is divine. It is an outpouring of love, a denial of 
vainglory, a depth of silence. 

For followers of the Lord, this manner of thinking operates 
abundantly at the beginning and they are greatly disturbed by it, as 
though by some holy fire. I mean separation from their relations for 
the sake of hardship and simplicity which drives on the lovers of this 
good. Yet for all that it is praiseworthy, it requires discretion, since 
not every kind of exile is good if taken to extremes. 

The Lord says that every prophet is without honor in his own 
country (cf. John 4:44). If He is right, then we had better be careful 
that our act of renunciation is not for empty honor. Exile is a separa- 
tion from everything, in order that one may hold on totally to God. It 
is a chosen route of great grief. An exile is a fugitive, running from all 
relationships with his own relatives and with strangers. Do not wait 
for souls enamored of the world when you are pressing on towards 
solitude and exile. In any case, death comes when least evpccied. 
Many set themselves the aim of rescuing the indifferent ami llu' 
lazy — and end up lost themselves. The flame within them iJftN dim 



H^ 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



with the passage of time. So, if you have the fire, run, since you never 
know when it may be doused, leaving you stranded in darkness. Not 
all of us are summoned to rescue others. "My brothers, each one of us 
will give an account of himself to God," says the holy Apostle (Rom. 
14:12). Again, he declares, "You teach someone else, but not yourself" 
(Rom. 2:21). It is as if he were saying, "I do not know about the oth- 
ers, but we have surely to look to what we must do ourselves." 

If you choose to go into exile, then be on the watch for the de- 
mon of wandering and of pleasure, since there is an opportunity here 
for him. 

Detachment is good and its mother is exile. Someone withdraw- 
ing from the world for the sake of the Lord is no longer attached to 
possessions, that he should not appear to be deceived by the passions. 
If you have left the world, then do not begin to reach out for it. Oth- 
erwise your passions will come back to you. Eve had no wish to be 
driven from Paradise, whereas a monk will abandon his homeland 
willingly; she would have wished again for the forbidden tree, but he 
has rebuffed the sure danger coming from the kinship of the flesh. 
Run from the places of sin as though from a plague. When fruit is not 
in plain sight, we have no great urge to taste it. 

You have to beware the ways and the guile of thieves. They come 
with the suggestion to us that we should not really abandon the 
world. They tell us of the rewards awaiting us if only we stay to look 
on women and to triumph over our desire for them. This is some- 
thing we must not give in to at all. Indeed, we must do the very oppo- 
site. 

Then again we manage for some time to live away from our rela- 
tives. We practice a tittle piety, compunction, self-control. And then 
the empty thoughts come tramping toward us, seeking to turn us 
back to the places we knew. They tell us what a lesson we are, what 
an example, what a help to those who witnessed our former wicked 
deeds. If we happen to be articulate and well informed, they assure us 
that we could be rescuers of souls and teachers to the world. They tell 
us all this so that we might scatter at sea the treasures we have assem- 
bled while in port. So we had better imitate Lot, and certainly not his 
wife. The soul turning back to the regions from which it came will be 
like the salt that has lost savor, indeed like that famous pillar. Run 
from Egypt, run and do not turn back. The heart yearning for the 
land there will never see Jerusalem, the land of dispassion." 

1 1. "The land of dispa.ssion" is an intcrprctiition of flic meaning of "|i'iijs;ilcin." 



86 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



Leaving home, some at the beginning are full of innocence. 
Their souls are clean. And then they want very much to go back, 
thinking, perhaps, that they might bring salvation to others, having 
attained it themselves. xMoses, that man who saw God, returned. In 
his case it was to save the members of his tribe. Still, he ran into many 
dangers in Egypt and was caught up in the darkness of the world. 

Offend your parents rather than God. He, after all, created and 
saved us, while they at times even killed the ones they loved, or hand- 
ed them over to destruction. 

A true exile, despite his possession of knowledge, sits like some- 
one of foreign speech among men of other tongues. 

If we have taken up the solitary life, we certainly ought not to 
abhor our own relations or our own places, but we ought to be care- 
ful to avoid any harm that may come from these. Here, as in every- 
thing, Christ is our teacher. It often looked as if He were trying to 
rebuff His earthly parents. Some people said to Him, "Your mother 
and your brothers are looking for you," and at once Christ gave an 
example of detachment that was nonetheless" free from any harsh feel- 
ings. "My mother and my brothers are those who do the will of my 
Father in heaven," He said (Matt. 12:50). So let your father be the one 
who is able and willing to labor with you in bearing the burden of 
your sins, and your mother the compunction that is strong enough to 
wash away your filth. Let your brother be your companion and rival 
in the race that leads to heaven, and may the constant thought of 
death be your spouse. Let your longed-for offspring be the moanings 
of your heart. May your body be your slave, and your friends the holy 
powers who can help you at the hour of dying if they become your 
friends. "This is the generation of those who seek the Lord" (Ps. 23:6). 

If you long for God, you drive out your love for family. Anyone 
telling you he can combine these yearnings is deceiving him.self. "No 
one can serve two masters" (Matt. 6;24). "I did not come to bring 
peace on earth," says the Lord, knowing how parents would rise up 
against sons or brothers who chose to serve Him. "It was for war and 
the sword" (Matt. 10:34), to separate the lovers of God from the lovers 
of the world, the materially-minded from the spiritually-minded, the 
vainglorious from the humble. 

Contradiction and dissent are pleasing to God when they ari.se 
from love of Him, but have a care that you do not find yourself .swejn 
away on a tide of .sentiment while you are yet passionately attiuhcd u> 
what was fatniliar (o you. Do not let the tears of parents or (Virtiitf* fill 



H7 



JOHN CMMACUS 



you with pity, lest yoii tiiul yoursflt weeping forever in the afterlife. 
When they circle .iroiind ynii like l>ee,s, or rather wasps, when they 
pour out their iametii.s over you, ilo not hesitate at all but think at 
once of your death and keep the eye of your sou! directed unswerv- 
ingly to what it used to do, that you may lie able to counteract one 
pain with another. Our kin, even our friL-tuls, make us false promises 
so as to restrain us from that noble eorUesi and so as to draw us back 
to their own goal. We had better withdraw from <)ur own locality. We 
had better flee to places which are less consoling and more conducive 
to lack of vanity and to humility. Otherwise we will take flight with 
our passions. 

You are of noble birth? Hide the fact. You are famous? Do not 
discuss it. Otherwise your status and your deeds may come into con- 
flict. 

['here is no greater example of renunciation than that great 
man '2 who heard the command, "Leave your country and your fam- 
ily and the house of your father" (Gen. 12:1). Obediently he went to a 
foreign country where the language was different. And so it is that 
anyone following this model of renunciation is glorified all the more 
by the Lord. 

But even though this glory is given by God, it is still good to de- 
flect it with the protective shield of humility. When demons or men 
lavish praise on us for our exile as if it were a great achievement, let 
us remind ourselves at once of Him Who came down from heaven for 
our benefit and exiled Himself to earth. Nothing we could ever do 
would match that. 

An attachment to any of our relations or even to a stranger is 
hard enough to deal with. It can gradually pull us back toward the 
world and make cool the fire of our contrition. You cannot look to 
heaven and to earth at the same time; similarly, if you have not 
turned your back completely on your relatives and others in thought 
and in body, you cannot avoid endangering your soul. 

To establish a good and firm character within ourselves is some- 
thing very difficult and troublesome, and one crisis can destroy what 
we have worked so hard to set right. Bad, worldly and disorderlv 
company destroys good character (cf. 1 Cor. 15:33). When a man has 
renounced the world and still returns to its affairs or draws near lo it, 
he will either fall into its snares or will defile his heart with thoughts 



12. Abraham. 



88 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



of it. He may perhaps be uncorrupted himself But if he comes to feel 
contempt for those who are corrupted, then assuredly he will join 
them in their corruption. 

Concerning the dreams of novices 

Our mind is the instrument of knowledge, but it is very imper- 
fect and filled with all sorts of ignorance. This is a fact that cannot be 
disguised. 

Now the palate discriminates between various kinds of food, the 
hearing distinguishes between the things it perceives, the sun shows 
up the weakness of the eyes, and words reveal the ignorance of a soul. 
Nevertheless, the law of love urges us to reach beyond ourselves, and 
so it seems to me — and I do not wish to be insistent — that, immediate- 
ly after this discussion of exile, or rather, in the course of it, some- 
thing ought to be said about dreams. For we should not be unaware of 
this type of deceit practiced by our wily enemies. 

A dream is a stirring of the mind during the body's rest, while a 
fantasy is something that tricks the eyes whcta the intellect is asleep. 
Fantasy occurs when the mind wanders, while the body is awake. A 
fantasy is the contemplation of something that does not actually exist. 

It must be clear why I have decided to speak here about dreams. 
After we leave home and family for the sake of the Lord, after we 
have gone into exile for the love of God, the demons try to shake us 
with dreams. They show us our relatives grieving, near death, pover- 
ty-stricken or imprisoned because of us. But the man who believes in 
dreams is like someone running to catch up with his own shadow. 

The devils of vainglory do their prophecies in dreams. They 
guess the future and, as part of their deceit, they inform us of it so 
that we are astonished to discover our visions coming true. Indeed we 
get carried away with the notion that we are already close to the gift 
of foreknowledge. 

To the credulous, a devil is a prophet; and to those who despise 
him, he is just a liar. Because he is a spiritual being, he knows what is 
happening in the lower regions, that someone is dying, for instance, 
so by way of dreams he passes the information on to the more gull- 
ible. However, demons lack actual foreknowledge. If they did not, 
the.se tricksters would be able to foretell our deaths. 

Devils often take on the appearance of angels of light or nuirlyrs 
and they appear to us in sleep and talk to us, so thai they can push ii>* 
into unholy joy and conceit when we wake u[). Bui lliis very efltHM 



89 



JOHN CI.IMACUS 



will reveal their trick, for what an^'cls actually reveal are torments, 
judgments, and separation, wi(h ilic result that on waking up we 
tremble and are miserable. And il we stnri to believe in the devils of 
our dreams, then we will be their playthings when we are also awake. 
The man who believes in dreams shows his inexperience, while 
the man who distrusts every dream is very sensible. Trust only the 
dreams that foretell torments and judgment for you, but even these 
dreams may also be from demons if they produce despair in you. 



This is the third step, equaling the number of the Three Persons. 
Whoever has reached it should look neither to right nor left. 



90 



Step 4 



ON OBEDIENCE 



It is right that our treatise should now deal with the warriors and 
athletes of Christ. 

As flower comes before every fruit, so exile of body or will pre- 
cedes all obedience. On these two virtues, as on two golden wings, the 
holy soul rises serenely to heaven. Perhaps it was of this the prophet 
sang when, filled with the Holy Spirit, he said, "Who will give me the 
wings of a dove?" and, "The active life will give me flight and I will 
be at rest in contemplation and lowliness" (Ps. 54:7). 

We ought not omit in this treatise a clear description of the 
weapons of those noble fighters, the shield of faith which they hold 
up before God, and before their trainer, and with which they ward 
off, so to speak, all thought of unbelief or backsliding; the spiritual 
sword that is always drawn and lays low every selfish longing; the 
iron breastplate of meekness and patience to ward off every insult, ev- 
ery jab and missile; the protective prayer of their spiritual master 
which they have as a saving helmet. They do not stand with their feet 
close together, but one foot is advanced towards service, while the 
other stays firmly planted in prayer. 

Obedience is a total renunciation of our own life, and it shows up 
clearly in the way we act. Or, again, obedience is the mortification of 
the members while the mind remains alive. Obedience is unques- 
tioned movement, death freely accepted, a simple life, danger fined 
without worry, an unprepared defense before Ciod, fearlcsMicsi be 



VI 



j()HNc:mma(;us 



fore death, a safe voyage, a sleeper's foiirney- Obedience is the burial 
place of the will and the resiirreiiinn of l()whness. A corpse does not 
contradict or debate the good or u hatever seems bad, and the spiritu- 
al father who has devoutly put the disciple's soul to death will answer 
for everything. Indeed, to obey is, with all deliberateness, to put aside 
the capacity to make one's own judgment. 

The beginning of the mortification both of the soul's will and 
also of the body's members is hard. The halfway stage is sometimes 
difficult, sometimes not. But the end is liberation from the senses and 
freedom from pain. 

The blessed living corpse grows sick at heart when he finds him- 
self acting on his own behalf, and he is frightened by the burden of 
using his own personal judgment. 

So you have decided to strip for the race of spiritual profession, 
to take Christ's yoke on your neck, to lay your own burden on the 
shoulders of another, to pledge your willing surrender to slavery? 
And for this you want it in writing that you get freedom in return, 
even when you swim across this great sea borne up on the hands of 
others? Very well, then. But you had better recognize that you have 
undertaken to travel by a short and rough road, along which there is 
only one false turning, that which they call self-direction'-^ and if that 
is avoided — even in matters seemingly good, spiritual, and pleasing to 
God — then straightaway one has reached journey's end. For the fact 
is that obedience is self-mistrust up to one's dying day, in every mat- 
ter, even the good. 

When humbly and with true longing for salvation we resolve to 
bend the neck and entrust ourselves to another in the Lord, there is 
something to be done before we start. If there happens to be any cun- 
ning in us, any prudence, then we should question, examine, and, if I 
may say so, put to the test our master, so that there is no mistaking 
the sailor for the helmsman, the patient for the doctor, the passionate 
for the dispassionate man, the sea for the harbor — with the resulting 
shipwreck of our soul. But having once entered the stadium of holy 
living and obedience, we can no longer start criticizing the umpire, 
even if we should notice some faults in him. After all, he is human 



[}. "Self-direction" (iiliorytbmia), says .scholion 2, Step 27 {1117B), "is to follow 
one's own regime and to satisfy one's own will." According to John it lends tfi hvpofri- 
sy (26|I024B1, p. 2.W), 



92 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



and if we start making judgments, then our submissiveness earns no 
profit. 

If we wish to preserve unshaken faith in our superiors, we must 
write their good deeds indelibly in our hearts and preserve them in 
our memories so that, when the demons scatter distrust of them 
among us, we can repel them by what we have retained in our minds. 
The more faith blossoms in the heart, the more the body is eager to 
serve. To stumble on distrust is to fall, since "whatever does not 
spring from faith is sin" (Rom. 14:23). When the thought strikes you 
to judge or condemn your superior, leap away as though from forni- 
cation. Give no trust, place, entry, or starting point to that snake. Say 
this to the viper: "Listen to me, deceiver, I have no right to pass judg- 
ment on my superior but he has the authority to be my judge. I do not 
judge him; he judges me." 

The Fathers have declared the singing of psalms to be a weapon, 
prayer to be a wall, and honest tears to be a bath. To them, blessed 
obedience is confession of faith, without which no one subject to pas- 
sions will see the Lord. ' 

He who is submissive is passing sentence on himself. If his obedi- 
ence for the Lord's sake is perfect, even when it does not appear to be 
so, he will escape judgment. But if in some things he follows his own 
will, then even though he thinks of himself as obedient, he takes the 
burden onto his own self. If the superior continues to rebuke him, 
then that is good; but if he gives up, I do not know what to say. 

Those who submit to the Lord with simple heart will run the 
good race. If they keep their minds on leash they will not draw the 
wickedness of demons onto themselves. 

Above all let us make our confession to our good judge, and to 
him alone, though to ail if he so commands. Wounds shown in public 
will not grow worse, but will be healed. 

In a monastery I once saw a judgment that was truly terrible. It 
was made by a superior who was good as a man and as a shepherd, 
and it happened while I was staying there. A robber sought admission 
to the monastic life, and that excellent superior, that man of healing, 
ordered him to take seven days of complete rest so that he might get 
to know the kind of life in the place. After a week the superior sent 
for him and asked him privately if he would like to live there among 
them. When the other man showed genuine enthusiasm for (his, he 
asked him what wrong he had done in the world, and on obsirviug 
the ready admi.ssion of everything, he tested him further, "I wmii vou 



Vt 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



to tell this to the brethren," he said. Since the other man had really 
come to hate his wrongdoing and was not troubled by shame, he 
promptly agreed. "I will confess in the middle of Alexandria itself, if 
you wish," he said. 

And so the superior gathered his flock into the church. There 
were 230 of them, and when the holy service was in progress, and the 
gospel had been read — for it was Sunday — this irreproachable convict 
was led out by some of the brethren who hit him, but lightly- He had 
his hands tied behind his back, he was wearing a hair shirt, and ashes 
had been sprinkled on his head. Everyone was amazed, and there 
were some shouts, for it was not clear what was happening. But when 
the robber appeared at the doors'* of the church, that very charitable 
superior said loudly to him: "Stop! You are not worthy to come in 
here." 

The robber was astounded by the voice of the superior coming 
from the sanctuary. (He swore afterwards that he thought he heard 
thunder and not a human voice.) At once he fell on his face and he 
trembled and shook with fear. While he lay on the ground, moisten- 
ing the floor with his tears, the marvelous healer turned to him, try- 
ing everything so as to save him and to give everyone else an example 
of salvation and true humility. Before all, he exhorted him to describe 
in detail everything he had done. Terrified, the robber confessed all, 
sins of the flesh, natural and unnatural, with humans and with beasts; 
poisonings, murders, and many other deeds too awful to hear or to set 
down on paper. Everyone was horrified. But when he had finished 
his confession, the superior allowed him to be given the habit at once 
and to be included in the ranks of the brethren. 

I was amazed by the wisdom of that holy man, and when we 
were alone 1 asked him why he had contrived such an extraordinary 
spectacle. "For two reasons," this true healer replied. "First, so that 
this man, having confessed now in shame, might in the future be 
spared fresh remorse for these deeds, which is what happened. He did 
not rise up from the floor, Brother John, until he had been granted 
forgiveness of all his sins. Have no doubt about this. Indeed one of the 
brethren who was present told me he saw a terrifying figure holding 
a book and a pen and crossing off each sin as it was confessed. Now 
this is quite probable if you bear in mind the words, 'I shall confess 



my wrongdoing to the Lord and You have taken away the wickedness 
of my heart' (Ps. 31:5). But there was a second reason. There are some 
among the brethren who have not confessed their sins and I want to 
encourage them to make their confession, for without this no one will 
be pardoned." 

I saw many other wonders and marvels in the company of that 
unforgettable pastor and his flock, and I will try to tell you a great 
deal about them. For I stayed quite a while with this man, studying 
their way of life and being constantly amazed at how these men of 
earth succeeded in imitating heavenly beings. 

An unbreakable bond of love joined these men together, and 
more wonderful was their freedom from all familiarity and idle chat- 
ter. Above all, they strove never to injure a brother's conscience. And 
if ever someone showed haired of another, the shepherd banished him 
like a convict to the isolation monastery.'^ Once when a brother 
spoke ill of a neighbor, the holy man, on hearing him, had him ex- 
pelled immediately. "I'm not having a visible devil here along with 
the invisible one," he said. < 

Among these holy fathers I saw things that were really profitable 
and worthy of admiration. I saw a fraternity assembled and united in 
the Lord and with a wonderful combination of action and contempla- 
tion. They were so taken up with the things of heaven and they prac- 
ticed so much good that they had little need of the promptings of the 
superior, and it was out of their own goodwill that they stirred each 
to divine vigilance. They had certain holy and divine exercises that 
were laid down, studied, and established. If the superior was away 
and a brother began to resort to abusive language, criticism of others, 
or merely idle chatter, a discreet nod from another pulled him up 
short and quietly stopped him. If it happened that the brother did not 
notice, then the one who reminded him would prostrate himself be- 
fore him and then go away. 

If they had to speak, what they talked about all the time was the 
remembrance of death and the thought of everlasting judgment. 

I must tell you about the astonishing achievement of the baker 
they had there. Noticing that during his work he preserved a totally 
recollected state and a capacity for tears, I asked him how he had 
managed to be granted such a grace. He answered me when I became 



!4. Between the main body of the church and the narthex. 



I S. 1 his is (he "Prison" which i.s described in detail below (p. 105 and Siep ^). 



94 



'H 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



insistent: "It always seems to me that I serve Clod and not men," he 
said. "And so I judge myself to be undeserving of any rest. And this 
fire'^ here reminds me of the everlasting fire to come." 

There is another achievement of theirs about which we should 
hear. Even in the refectory they did not cease from mental prayer/' 
and by secret signs and gestures these holy men reminded each other 
of it. And they did this not only in the refectory, but everywhere they 
met or assembled. 

If one of them committed a fault, many of the brothers would 
seek his permission to take the matter to the shepherd and to accept 
both the responsibility and the punishment. When the great man 
found out that his disciples did this, he inflicted easier punishments, 
in the knowledge that the one punished was actually innocent. And 
he made no effort to discover the real culprit. 

And what of idle talk and levity? Or if one of them started a row 
with a neighbor, a third who happened to pass by would undertake 
penance for it — and thus dissolve the anger. If he noticed that bad 
feeling somehow persisted among the disputants, he would report the 
matter to the father who was next to the superior and he would pre- 
pare for a reconciliation to be made before sundown. But if they per- 
sisted in their hard feelings, they would get no food until they had 
resolved their difference, or else they were driven from the monas- 
tery. 

Praiseworthy sternness of this kind has reached a high point 
among them and bears plenty of fruit. Many of these holy fathers be- 
came experts in active life and in spirituality, in discernment and hu- 
mility. Among them was the awful and yet angelic sight of men 
grey-haired, venerable, preeminent in holiness, still going about like 
obedient children and taking the greatest delight in their lowliness. I 
have seen men there who lived in total obedience for all of fifty years, 
and when I begged them to tell me what consolation they had won 
from so great a labor, some answered that having arrived thereby ai 
the lowest depths of abasement they could repel every onslaught, 
while others declared that they had attained complete freedom from 
the senses and had obtained serenity amid every calumny and insuli. 



16. I.e., of the bakery. 

17. By mental prayer itinera ergasia)](yhn means a concentrated state of recollect mjii 
in the depths of the heart. Elsewhere he says, "If you arc careful to train your iniiul 
ne%er to wander, it will stay by you even at mealtimes" (28 [1 1.5 .'A|, p- 27fi). 



96 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



I saw others among these wonderful fathers who had the white 
hair of angels,'^ the deepest innocence, and a wise simplicity that was 
spontaneous and yet directed by God Himself, The fact is that just as 
an evil person is two-faced, one thing in public and another in pri- 
vate, so a simple person is not twofold, but something whole.''' 'I'here 
is no one among them who is silly and foolish in the way that some 
old men in the world are, as they say, senile. No indeed. They are 
openly gentle, kindly, radiant, genuine, without hypocrisy, affecta- 
tion, or falsity of either speech or disposition — something not found 
in many. Spiritually, they are like children, with God and the superi- 
or as their very breath, and with the mind's eye on strict lookout for 
demons and the passions. 

Holy Father and Brothers in God, a lifetime would not be 
enough to allow me to describe the virtue of those blessed men, or the 
heavenly life they lead. Still, their great struggles rather than my 
meager suggestions should adorn this treatise and should rouse you to 
be zealous in the love of God. After all, the lowly is adorned by the 
excellent, and I would only ask you to refr^ain from thinking that 
what I write is something made up, for a suspicion of this kind would 
only take away from its value. 

So, then, let us resume. 

In this monastery to which I have been referring, there was a 
man named Isidore, from Alexandria, who having belonged to the 
ruling cla.ss had become a monk. I met him there. The most holy 
shepherd, after having let him join, discovered that he was a trouble- 
maker, cruel, sly, and haughty, but he shrewdly managed to outwit 
the cunning of the devils in him. "If you have decided to accept the 
yoke of Christ," he told Isidore, "I want you first of all to learn obedi- 
ence." 

"Most holy Father, I submit to you like iron to the blacksmith," 
Isidore replied. 

The superior, availing of this metaphor, immediately gave exer- 
cise to the iron Isidore and said to him: "Brother, this is what I want 
you to do. You are to stand at the gate of the monastery, and before 



18. White hair is often a.ssociated with angels {cf Tk Liz-cs of the Desert Fath-rs | I'hc 
Hislnria Motiacborum m Aegypto] II, 1, Abba Or). The mona.stic life is the angelic lilc "U 
earth because those who have truly attained it are Irke the antfcls; .servants of (iod .ind 
of men, free Ironi sin, and as fret a,s is hurnaniv possible from maierial needs, 

I''. I Ills senience is nnssin^r in some versions. 



97 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



everyone passing in or out you iire to bend the knee and say, 'Pray for 
me, Father, because I am an epileptic' " And Isidore obeyed, like an 
angel obeying the Lord. 

He spent seven years at the gate, and achieved deep humility and 
compunction. 

After the statutory seven years^" and after the wonderful stead- 
fastness of the man, the superior deemed him fully worthy to be ad- 
mitted to the ranks of the brethren and wanted to ordain him. 
Through others and also through my feeble intercession, Isidore 
begged the superior many times to let him finish his course. He hint- 
ed that his death, his call, was near, which in fact proved to be so. The 
superior allowed him to stay at his place, and ten days later, humbly, 
gloriously, he passed on to the Lord. A week after his death the porter 
of the monastery was also taken, for the blessed Isidore had said to 
him, "If I have found favor in the sight of the Lord, you loo will be 
inseparably joined to me within a short time." That is exactly what 
happened, in testimony to his unashamed obedience and his marvel- 
ous humility. 

While he was still alive, I asked this great Isidore how he had oc- 
cupied his mind while he was at the gate, and this memorable man 
did not conceal anything from me, for he wished to be of help. "At 
first I judged that I had been sold into slavery for my sins," he said. 
"So I did penance with bitterness, great effort, and blood. After a 
year my heart was no longer full of grief, and I began to think of a 
reward for my obedience from God Himself. Another year passed 
and in the depths of my heart I began to see how unworthy I was to 
live in a monastery, to encounter the fathers, to share in the divine 
Mysteries. I lost the courage to look anyone in the face, but lowering 
my eyes and lowering my thoughts even further, I asked with true 
sincerity for the prayers of those going in and out." 

Once when I was sitting in the refectory with the superior, he 
asked me in a whisper if I would like to see holy prudence in someone 
very old. When I said I wished that very much, he summoned from 
the second table a man called Lawrence who had been about forty- 
eight years in the monastery and was second priest in the monastery. 



20. No monastic rule laid down a seven year probation. But a seven years' penanct' 
was required by the Apostolic Canons for fornication. In view of the deacon Macedon- 
ius' reference to the "fornication of disobedience" (p. 101), it mav be that the superior 
treated l.sidore's haughtincs.s as f<irniciition. 



9g 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



He came, genuflected before the abbot and received his blessing. 
When he stood up the abbot said nothing at all to him but left him 
standing beside the table and not eating. It was just the start of the 
midday meal .so that he was left standing there a full hour, probably 
two. 1 was embarrassed to look this hard-working man in the face, for 
he was completely white-haired and all of eighty years. He stayed 
there until we had finished eating, and when we got up, the holy man 
sent him off to the great Isidore to recite to him the beginning of the 
thirty-ninth psalm, ^^ 

Being myself a bad character, I did not let slip the chance to tease 
the old man, so I asked him what he had been thinking about as he 
stood by the table. "I thought of the shepherd as the image of Christ," 
he said. "I thought of the command as coming not from him but from 
God, And so. Father John, I stood praying as if I were in front of the 
altar of God rather than the table of men; and because I trust and love 
my shepherd, I had no malevolent thoughts concerning him. It is said 
that love does not reckon up injury. But be sure of this much, Father, 
that anyone who freely chooses to be simple and guileless provides 
the devil with neither the time nor the place for an attack." 

And the just Lord sent that shepherd of the holy flock someone 
just like himself to be bursar of the monastery. He was modest, like 
few others, and gentle as very few are. As a help to the others, the 
great elder once pretended to get angry with him in church and or- 
dered him out before the usual time. Now I knew that he was inno- 
cent of the charge laid against him by the pastor, and when we were 
alone I started to plead with the great man on behalf of the bursar. 
But this is what the wise man said: "Father, I too know he is inno- 
cent. But just as it would be a pity and indeed quite wrong to snatch 
bread from the mouth of a starving child, so too the director of souls 
does harm to himself and to the ascetic if he denies him frequent op- 
portunities to gain crowns such as the superior thinks he deserves at 
each hour, through having to put up with insults, dishonor, con- 
tempt, and mockery. Three things happen that are very wrong: first, 
the director misses the rewards due to him for making corrections; 
second, the director fails to bring profit to others when he could have 
done so through the virtue of that one person; but third, and worst, is 
that those who seem to be the most hard-working and obedient and 
hence confirmed in virtue, if left for any length of time without being 



21. "1 wailed |iaiiemly for the Lord, Me inclined to itic and heard my cl'y ' 



•;<> 



JOHN CI.IMACUS 



censured or reproached by the superior, lose that meekness and obe- 
dience they formerly had. CJood, fruitful, and fertile land, if left with- 
out the water of dishonor, can revert in being forest and can produce 
the thorns of vanity, cowardice,^'^ and arrogance. The great Apostle 
understood this. Hence his instruction to Timothy: "Be insistent, 
criticize them, rebuke in season and out of season" (2 Tim. 4:2). 

But when I argued the matter with that true director, reminding 
him of human frailty, I suggested that punishment, deserved or other- 
wise, might lead many to break away from the flock. That man, in 
whom wisdom had made a home, had this to say to me: "A soul bound 
in faith and love to the shepherd for Christ's sake does not go away, 
even when blood is spilt. He certainly does not leave if through the 
shepherd he has received the cure for his wounds, for he bears in 
mind the words, 'Neither angels, nor principalities, nor powers nor 
any other creature can separate us from the love of Christ' (cf Rom. 
8:38-39). If a soul is not attached, bound, and devoted to the shepherd 
in this fashion, it seems to me that the man should not be here at all; 
for what binds him to the shepherd is hypocrisy and false obedience." 
And the truth is that this great man is not deceived, for he has guided, 
led to perfection, and offered to Christ blameless sacrifices. 

Let us listen to the wisdom of God found in earthen vessels and 
marvel at it. 

While I was there I was astonished by the faith and the patience 
of the novices. With unshakable courage they accepted the criticisms 
of the superior and indeed of those far below him in rank. 

For my own edification I put questions to one of the brothers, 
called Abbacyrus, who had lived fifteen years in the monastery and 
who, as I saw, was badly treated by nearly everyone. Those serving at 
table drove him out almost daily for being naturally unrestrained in 
his talk. "Brother Abbacyrus," I asked, "why do I see you thrown out 
of the refectory every day and going without supper to bed?" 

"Father," he answered, "you may be sure that they are testing 
me to find out if I would ever make a monk. They do not really mean 
to be harsh. I know what the superior and they are trying to do, and 
so I put up with all this and do not become burdened by it. I have 
done it now for fifteen years. At the time I came into the monastery 
they told me that those who renounce the world are tested for thirty 



22. In place of "cowardice" Rader's text has "lewdness" (porneia). 



100 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



years. And they are right, Father John, for gold is not purified unless 
it has been tested." 

This fine man Abbacyrus lived for two more years after my arri- 
val at the monastery. Just before he passed on to the Lord, he said this 
to the fathers: "I thank the Lord and I thank you. For my own salva- 
tion you put me to the test, and for seventeen years now I have lived 
without being tempted by devils." And the just superior gave orders 
that he had earned the right to be buried as a confessor with the local 
saints. 

Now I would do wrong to all those eager for perfection if I were 
to bury in the tomb of silence the achievement and the reward of 
Macedonius, the first of their deacons, a man zealous for God. 

On one occasion, just two days before the feast of the Holy The- 
ophany,^^ he asked the superior for permission to go to Alexandria 
for a certain personal matter. He promised to get back from the city 
in time for the preparation for the feast. The devil, however, who 
loathes everything good, contrived to put an obstacle in the way of 
the archdeacon, who, although permitted to, leave the monastery, did 
not return for the holy feast at the time set by the superior. He came 
back a day late, was deposed from the diaconate by the pastor, and 
was put in the rank of the lowest novices. This good deacon^* of obe- 
dience, this archdeacon of patience, accepted the decision of the fa- 
ther as calmly as though the punishment had been meted out to 
someone else. After forty days in that state, he was restored to his pre- 
vious rank by the pastor; but scarcely a day later the archdeacon 
begged to be put back to his former condition of discipline and dis- 
honor, saying, "I committed an unforgivable sin while I was in the 
city." This was untrue, and the holy superior knew it. The ascetic 
was looking for punishment for the sake of humility, and his wish 
was granted. Then came the spectacle of a white-haired elder passing 
his days as a novice, and sincerely begging everyone to pray for him. 
"I fell into the fornication of disobedience," he said, but secretly this 
great Macedonius explained to me, lowly that I am, why he had vol- 
untarily adopted a humbled life of this kind. "I have never felt such 
absence of conflict within me, such sweetness of divine light, as 
now," he said. "It is said of angels that they do not, or, as some would 



2}. January 6. 

?4, "Deiu'oti" niciins "servant" in Greek. 



101 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



have it, that they cannot fall. But men fall, yet they can quickly rise 
again as often as this may happen to them. Devils, and devils only, 
never rise once they have fallen." 

There was a brother there, the bursar of the monastery, who had 
this to say to me in confidence: "When I was young and had charge of 
the animals,^^ I had a very bad spiritual failure, but since it was never 
my custom to conceal a snake in the hiding place of my heart I 
grabbed it forthwith by the tail — meaning that I ended the matter — 
and I revealed it at once to the healer. He gave me a light blow on the 
chin, smiled, and said to me, 'AH right, child, go back to your job and 
do not be in the slightest way afraid.' With heart on fire I did as I was 
told, and within a few days I knew I was cured; and so, with a mix- 
ture of joy and fear, I carried on." 

They say that every creature has differences that mark it off from 
others. That is how it was in the assembly of the brothers, where dif- 
ferences of success and disposition were to be found. If the healer ob- 
served some showing off before visitors to the monastery from the 
outside world, he used to heap the worst insults on them in the pres- 
ence of the visitors and used to send them off on the most humiliating 
jobs, with the result that they would hastily retreat, and the arrival of 
the secular visitors would turn out to be an opportunity for self-mas- 
tery. Thus there was to be seen the extraordinary spectacle of vanity 
chasing herself out of sight. 

The Lord did not want to deprive me of the prayer of one of the 
holy fathers in the monastery. And so a week before I left He took to 
Himself a marvelous man called Menas, the second priest of the mon- 
astery, a man who for fifty-nine years had lived in the community 
and had served in every office. Three days after the death of this 
saintly monk, when we had finished with the customary rites, the 
place where he lay was suddenly filled with a great fragrance. We 
were allowed by the superior to open the coffin in which he lay, and 
when this was done we had sight of what seemed like two streams of 
myrrh flowing from his venerable feet. The teacher said to all of us: 
"Look, the sweat of his labors has been offered up as myrrh to God, 
and has been truly accepted." 

The fathers of that place described many of the triumphs of this 
holy saint Menas. Among them were what follows. On one occasion 
the superior wanted to test his God-given patience. Coming in the 



2.^. I.e., the beasts of burden belonging to the monastery (cf. 1-' [KKSUCJj, p. 17?) 



102 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



evening to the abbot's cell he prostrated himself and, in the custom- 
ary fashion, he asked for his instructions. However, the abbot left him 
on the ground until the time came for the Office and only then did he 
give him his blessing. But the holy man, knowing his heroic endur- 
ance, criticized him for self-display and impatience. He did it for the 
edification of everyone. 

This story was confirmed by a disciple of the holy Menas. "I 
wanted to find out if he had fallen asleep while he was prostrate on 
the ground before the holy abbot. But he assured me that he had recit- 
ed the entire psalter while lying down." 

There is an emerald to adorn the crown of this discourse, and I 
must not forget to tell of it. For on one occasion I initiated a discus- 
sion of stillness among the most experienced elders there. They 
smiled and in their own cheerful way they spoke to me courteously as 
follows: "Father John, we are corporeal beings and we lead a corpore- 
al life. Knowing this, we choose to wage war according to the mea- 
sure of our weakness, and we think it belter to struggle with men 
who sometimes rage and are sometimes contrite than to do battle 
with demons who are always in a rage and always carrying arms 
against us." 

One of those memorable men showed me great love according to 
God. He was outspoken, and once, in his own kindly fashion, he said 
this to me: "Wise man, if you have consciously within you the power 
of him who said, 'I can do everything in Christ Who strengthens me' 
(Phil. 4:13), if the Holy Spirit has come upon you as on the Holy Vir- 
gin with the dew of purity, if the power of the Most High has cast the 
shadow of patience over you, then, like Christ our God, gird your 
loins with the towel of obedience, rise from the supper of stillness, 
wash the feet of your brethren in a spirit of contrition, and roll your- 
self under the feet of the brethren with humbled will. Place strict and 
unsleeping guards at the gateway of your heart. Practice inward still- 
ness amid the twistings and the turbulence of your limbs. And, 
strangest of all perhaps, keep your soul undisturbed while tumult 
rages about you. 

"Your tongue tongs to jump into argument, but restrain it. It is a 
tyrant, and you must fight it daily seventy times seven. Fix your 
mind to your soul as to the wood of a cross, strike it with alternating 
hammer blows like an anvil. It has to be mocked, abused, ridiculed, 
and wronged, though without in any way being crushed or broken; 
indeed it must keep calm and unstirred. Shed your will as if it were 



[()< 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



some disgraceful garment, and having thus stripped yourself of it, go 
into the practice arena. Put on the breastplate of faith, which is so 
hard to come by, and let it not be crushed or damaged by distrust of 
your trainer. Let the rein of temperance curb the shameless onward 
leap of the sense of touch. With meditation on death bridle those eyes 
so ready to waste endless hours in the contemplation of physical 
beauty. Hold back your mind, so busy with its own concerns, so 
ready to turn to the reckless criticism and condemnation of your 
brother. Show instead every love and sympathy for your neighbor. 
Dearest father, all men will come to know that we are disciples of 
Christ if, as we live together, we have love for one another. Stay here 
with us, my friend, stay. Drink down ridicule by the hour, as if it 
were living water. David tried every pleasure under the sun, and at 
the end was at a loss saying, 'Behold, what is good or what is pleas- 
ant?' (Ps. 132:1). And there was nothing except that brothers should 
live together in unity. But if this blessing of patience and obedience 
has still not been given to us, then the best thing to do is, having dis- 
covered our weakness, to stay away from the athletes' stadium, to 
bless the contestants, and to pray that it might be granted to them to 
endure." 

Such was the discourse of this good father and excellent teacher, 
who argued with me in an evangelical and prophetic way, like a 
friend. And I was persuaded, so that with no hesitation I agreed to 
give first place to blessed obedience. 

When I have noted down a further profitable virtue of these 
blessed fathers, one that is surely from Paradise, I will come back to 
my own unlovely and useless briar patch. 

The blessed pastor noticed that some continued to talk while the 
rest of us were standing at prayer. He made them stand in front of 
the church for a whole week and they had to make a prostration be- 
fore everyone going in or out. And, what was even more surprising, 
he did it to people of clerical rank, that is, to priests. 

I noticed one brother during the singing of the psalms. He 
showed more feeling than many of the others, and his movements and 
expressions were such as to make it look as though he were carrying 
on a conversation with someone. This was particularly so at the be- 
ginning of the hymns. I asked the holy man to explain this to me and 
because he knew it was to my advantage that he should not be reti- 
cent about it, he said this to me: 'Tather John, it is my custom at the 
very start to gather my thoughts, my mind and my soul. 1 call to them 



104 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



and cry out, 'Come! Let us worship and fall down before Christ, our 
King and God' " (cf. Ps. 94:6). 

I also paid special attention to the brother in charge of the refec- 
tory. I noticed that he had a small book hanging in his belt, and I 
learned that every day he noted down his thoughts^^ in it and showed 
them to the shepherd. I found out that many of the brothers did this 
also as well as he, and I was told that this was on the instructions of 
the superior. 

The shepherd once expelled a brother for having described a 
neighbor to him as a gossip and a blatherer. For an entire week the 
expelled monk remained at the gates of the monastery, begging entry 
and forgiveness. Now when that lover of souls discovered this, when 
he heard that the brother had eaten nothing for six days, he said to 
him: "If you really want to live in the monastery, I will put you down 
into the ranks of the penitents." The contrite monk gladly agreed, 
and the shepherd ordered him to be taken to the separate monastery 
for those who are in mourning for their failures. And so it was done. 

But since I have mentioned this monastery I must say a few 
words about it. 

A mile away from the great monastery was a harsh place called 
the Prison where smoke,^^ or wine, or oil for food or anything else 
was never seen, only bread and chopped vegetables. Here were shut 
up without permission to go out those who after entering monastic 
life had fallen into sin. Nor were they all together. Each had his own 
cell, or two at most might be together until the Lord gave the superi- 
or some assurance regarding each one of them. A great man named 
Isaac was in charge of them, and he demanded of them that they pray 
with scarcely an interruption. To ward off despondency they were 
given great quantities of palm leaves. ^^ Such was their existence and 
rule, such their life-style, these men who truly sought the face of the 
God of Jacob! 

It is a good thing to admire the labors of holy men; to imitate 
them procures salvation. But it is unreasonable and impossible to 
wish to imitate, on a sudden whim, every aspect of the way they live. 



26. rhese thoughts {logismoi) are not simply reflections but inward promptings, 
some of which may be demonic. The superior would be able to discern which are help- 
ful and which are not. 

27. I.e., cooked food. 

2H. I'or niiikinfj baskets and plaiting mats. 



\m 



JOHN CIJMACUS 



When wc arc bitten by rebukes, Ifi ns be mindful of our sins un- 
til the Lord, seeing the deterininaiion o) our efforts, wipes away our 
sins and turns to joy thm sadness cjiiing our hearts. It is written: 
"Your consolations have gladdened my .soul according to the number 
of my sorrows" (Ps. 93:]'>), and at the right lime we should remember 
the words spoken to the Lord: "How many troubles and evils have 
You shown me, and You turned around to revive me. You brought 
me up from the depths of the earth when I had fallen" (Ps. 70:20). 

Bles.sed is he who, slandered and despi.sed every day for the 
Lord's sake, still restrains himself. He will be in the chorus of martyrs 
and will talk familiarly with angels. Blessed is the monk who thinks 
of himself by the hour as having earned all dishonor and contempt. 
Blessed is he who mortifies his will to the very end and who leaves 
the care of himself to his director in the Lord. He will be placed at the 
right hand of the Crucified. But he who refuses to accept a criticism, 
just or not, renounces his own salvation, while he who accepts it, 
hard or not though it may be, will soon have his sins forgiven. 

Show God in your heart the faith you have in your spiritual fa- 
ther and the honest love you have for him. God in ways unknown 
will urge him to be well disposed to you and fond of you, just as you 
are well disposed toward him. 

He who exposes every serpent shows the reality of his faith, 
while he who hides them still walks the trackless wastes. 

A man will know that he truly loves his brother when he weeps 
for the sins of that brother and is delighted by his progress and by the 
gifts given to him. 

A man should know that a devil's sickness is on him if he is 
seized by the urge in conversation to as.sert his opinion, however cor- 
rect it may be. If he behaves this way while talking to his equals, then 
a rebuke from his seniors may heal him. But if he carries on in this 
way with those who are greater and wiser than he, his sickness can- 
not be cured by human means. 

He who is not submissive in his talk will certainly not be so in 
what he does. To be unfaithful in the small things is to be unfaithful 
in the great, and this is very hard to bring under control. Such a 
monk labors in vain, and from holy obedience he will bring nothing 
but judgment on himself. 

Someone with a totally clear conscience in the matter of being 
obedient to his spiritual father waits each day for death — as though it 
were sleep, or rather life; and he is unafraid, knowing with certainty 



106 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



that when it is time to go, not he but his spiritual director will be 
called to render an account. 

If someone freely undertakes a task for his spiritual father and 
falls while doing it, he should blame not the father who gave him the 
weapon but himself. For it was he who accepted the weapon of battle 
against the enemy, but has turned it instead against his own heart. 
But if for the Lord's sake he compelled himself to accept the task, 
even though he first explained his own weakness to the spiritual fa- 
ther, then let him take heart. He may have fallen, but he is not dead. 

One sweet loaf of virtue I have forgotten to set before you, my 
friends. I saw there servants of the Lord who subjected themselves to 
insult and contempt for God's sake, so that by this kind of prepara- 
tion they would not falter beneath the insults coming from others. 

Confession is like a bridle that keeps the soul which reflects on it 
from committing sin, but anything left unconfessed we continue to 
do without fear as if in the dark. 

If we picture for ourselves the face of the superior whenever he 
happens to be away, if we think of him as Always standing nearby, if 
we avoid every gathering, word, meal, sleep, or indeed anything to 
which we think he might object, then we have really learned true 
obedience. False children are glad when the teacher is away, but the 
genuine think it a loss. 

I once asked a very experienced father how humility is achieved 
through obedience. This was his answer: "A wisely obedient man, 
even if he is able to raise the dead, to have the gift of tears, to be free 
from conflict, will nevertheless judge that this happened through the 
prayer of his spiritual director; and so he remains a stranger and an 
alien to empty presumption. For how could he take pride in some- 
thing that, by his reckoning, is due to the effort not of himself but of 
his director?" 

Now, of course, the practice of the above virtue is not something 
known to the hermit. ^^ His conceit attributes his righteous acts to 
himself, suggesting that his achievements are the result of his own ef- 
forts. For the fact is that he who lives in obedience has eluded two 
snares^o and remains an obedient servant of Christ for the future. 



29. (jk hesycbastis, one who practices stillnes,s (cf. note 9), whether alone, with one 
or two others, or in community, '['he word is translated by 'hermit" or "holiiury" 
when the monk is clenrly alone; otherwise the term "hesychast" is used. 

to. I.c , (liNol(r)liriiir iinil Conceit. 



107 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



The devil goes to battle with those in obedience. Sometimes he 
defiles them with bodily pollutions and hardheartedness or makes 
them more restless than usual, sometimes he makes them dry and bar- 
ren, sluggish at prayer, sleepy and unilluminated. He does this to 
bring discouragement to their efforts, making them think that their 
obedience has brought no profit and that they are only regressing. He 
keeps them from realizing that very often the providential withdraw- 
al of what seem to be our goods is the harbinger of our deepest humil- 

That deceiver is often overcome by patient endurance, and yet 
while he is still talking there is another angel standing by to cheat us 
a little later in a different fashion. 

I have known men living under obedience who, guided by their 
director, became contrite, meek, self-controlled, zealous, free of tur- 
moil, fervent. Then came the demons. They suggested to them that 
they were now qualified for the solitary life, that as hermits they 
would win the ultimate prize of total freedom from passion. Thus 
fooled, they left harbor and put to sea, and when the storm lowered 
onto them, their lack of pilots left them pitifully exposed to disaster 
from this foul and bitter ocean. 

This sea has to be stirred up, provoked and made angry so as to 
jettison onto dry land the wood, the hay, the corruption carried into 
it by the rivers of passion. Notice what happens in nature. After a 
storm at sea comes a deep calm. 

The man who sometimes obeys his director and sometimes not 
resembles the person who puts into his eyes now medicine and now 
quicklime. It is said, "When one man builds and another pulls down, 
what has been the profit of their labor?" (Eccius. 34:2?). 

Son, obedient servant of the Lord, do not be so fooled by the spir- 
it of conceit that you confess your sins to your director as though 
they were someone else's. Lay bare your wound to the healer. Only 
through shame can you be freed from shame.-" Tell him, and do not 
be ashamed: "This is my wound. Father; this is my injury. It hap- 
pened because of my negligence and not from any other cause. No 
one is to blame for this, no man, spirit or body or anything else. It is 
all through my negligence." 

At confession you should look and behave like a condemned man. 
Keep your head bowed and, if you can, shed tears on the feet of your 



31. In H'i'M's text the sentence later in brackets is inserted here. 



108 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



judge and healer, as though he were Christ. (Very often demons man- 
age to persuade us either to omit confession, or else to confess as 
though the sins were committed by someone else or else to blame oth- 
ers as responsible for our own sins.) 

Habit forms things and follows them. And it is particularly true 
that virtue depends on habit, and here God is the great collaborator. 

My son, if at the very start you manage to allow your entire soul 
to suffer indignities, you will not have to struggle for many years in 
search of blessed peace. 

You must not imagine that prostrating yourself in confession to 
your helper, as if he were God Himself, is in any way wrong. Con- 
demned criminals, by their sorry looks, by earnest confession and 
pleadings, have softened the harshness of a judge and turned his rage 
to mercy. I have seen it happen. That is why John the Baptist de- 
manded of those who came to him that they make their confession be- 
fore baptism, not because he wanted to know their sins, but in order 
to bring about their salvation. 

We ought not be surprised if the attack; continue to come even 
after confession. In any case, it is better to be battling with our 
thoughts^^ rather than our self-esteem. 

Do not get excited or carried away by the stories concerning he- 
sychasts and hermits. You are marching in the army of the First Mar- 
tyr, and in the event of a fall you should remain on the practice 
ground, since then more than ever one needs a healer. He who strikes 
his foot against a rock while being helped would not only have stum- 
bled unaided, but would have died. 

It is when we are brought low that the demons quickly pounce. 
They suggest what looks like a reasonable pretext — though in fact it 
is not — to take up the life of solitude. Our enemies hope to wound us 
when we are committing sin. 

When a doctor says he cannot help you, then you must go to an- 
other, since few are cured without one. Who, indeed, would disagree 
if I were to say that a ship wrecked while there was a skilled pilot 
aboard would quite certainly have been lost if there had been no pilot 
at all? 

Humility arises out of obedience, and from humility itself comes 
dispassion, for "the Lord remembered us in our humility and saved 
us from our enemies" (Ps. 135:23-24). So we can rightly say that from 



12. Riiiler's Icvl rcnits "finllutions" (molysmois), not "thoughts" (logismois). 



]{)') 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



obedience comes dispassion, through which the goal of humiHty is at- 
tained. Humihty is the beginning of dispassion, as Moses is the begin- 
ning of the Law, as the daughter completes the mother and Mary 
completes the synagogue. 

The sick who try out a healer, receive help from him, and then, 
before being fully cured, jettison him for the sake of another deserve 
every punishment from God. Do not run from the hands of him who 
has brought you to the Lord, for never in your life again will you re- 
spect anyone as you did him. 

It is not safe for an untried soldier to leave the ranks and take up 
single combat. Equally, it is dangerous for a monk to undertake the 
solitary life before he has had plenty of experience and practice in the 
battle with the passions of the soul. The one man jeopardizes his 
body, the other his soul. Now Scripture says, "Two are better than 
one" (Eccles. 4:9), meaning that it is better for a son to be with his 
father as, aided by the divine power of the Holy Spirit, he fights 
against his predispositions. He who deprives a blind man of his guide, 
a flock of its shepherd, a lost man of his counselor, a child of its fa- 
ther, a sick man of his doctor, a ship of its pilot, becomes a menace to 
everyone. And he who tries to fight unaided against the spirits gets 
himself killed by them. 

Those entering a hospital for the first time should indicate where 
they hurt, and those entering on obedience should show their humil- 
ity. Relief from pain is the sign of a return to health for the one, while 
increasing self-criticism is the sign for the other. Indeed, there is no 
clearer sign. 

It is enough that your conscience should be the mirror of your 
obedience. 

Those living in stillness and subject to a father have only demons 
working against them. But those living in a community have to fight 
both demons and human beings. The first kind keep the commands of 
their master more strictly since they are always under his scrutiny, 
while the latter break them to some extent on account of his being 
away. Still, the zealous and the hard-working more than compensate 
for this failing by their persistence, and accordingly they win double 
crowns. 

We ought to be very careful to keep a watch on ourselves. When 
a harbor is full of ships it is easy for them to run against each other, 
particularly if they are secretly riddled by the worm of bad temper. 



110 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN I 



We should practice complete silence and ignorance in the pres- 
ence of the superior, for a silent man is a son of wisdom and is always 
gaining great knowledge. I have watched while a monk anticipated 
the words of his superior, but I trembled for his obedience because I 
observed that this tendency led him to pride rather than lowliness. 

Let us be all vigilance, care, and watchfulness as to when and in 
what form service should take precedence over prayer. For you can- 
not do all things all the time. 

Watch yourself when you are in the presence of your brothers 
and under no circumstances should you put yourself forward as being 
better than they. For if you do, then you will be doubly in the wrong, 
provoking them with your fake zeal and stirring yourself up to pre- 
sumption. 

Be zealous within your soul, but do not give the slightest sign, 
word, or hint of it outwardly; and you will manage this as soon as you 
stop looking down on your neighbor, something you may be inclined 
to do. And if so, then become like your brethren in order not to differ 
from them solely by the measure of your cdnceit. 

I once saw an inexperienced disciple who used to boast in certain 
quarters about the achievement of his teacher. He imagined that in 
this way he would win glory for himself from another's harvest. But 
he only got a bad name for himself, for everyone put this question to 
him: "How then could a good tree grow such a dead branch?" 

We do not get the name of being patient when we bravely endure 
the derision of our father, but only when we endure it from every 
kind of person. For we put up with our father out of respect and be- 
cause it is our duty. 

Drink deeply of scorn from every man, as though it were living 
water handed you to cleanse you from lust. Then indeed will a deep 
purity dawn in your soul and the light of God will not grow dim in 
your heart. 

If someone observes that his brothers are satisfied with him, let 
him not start boasting to himself. There are thieves all around. Re- 
member the warning: "When you have done all that was laid on you 
to do, say, 'We are unprofitable servants. We did only what we had 
to' " (Luke 17:10). We will find out at the time of death what judg- 
ment has been passed on us. 

A monastery is heaven on earth, so let us tune our hearts like an- 
gels serving the L<ird. It happens occasionally that those living in this 



111 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



heaven possess hearts of stone. Yet by means of compunction they ac- 
quire consolation so that they escape from conceit, and they hghten 
their labors with their tears. 

A small fire can soften a great lump of wa.x, and a small indignity 
will often ease, sweeten, and wipe away all the heart's harshness, in- 
sensibility and hardness. 

I once saw two people sitting out of sight and watching the toils 
and hearing the groans of the ascetics. One did this so as to be able to 
imitate them. But the other did it so that when the time came he 
could laugh at God's laborer and get in the way of his good work. 

Do not become silent in an unreasonable way that causes distur- 
bance and hard feeling in others, and do not let your behavior and 
progress slow down when you have been told to hurry. Otherwise 
you will be worse than the possessed and the rebellious. I have often 
seen such things as these, as Job says (cf, Job 13:1), that is, souls bur- 
dened sometimes by slowness of character and sometimes by exces- 
sive eagerness. I was astounded by the variety of evil. 

He who is in the company of others can get more benefit from 
prayer than from singing the psalms, for the confusion of voices 
makes the psalms indistinct. 

Fight always with your thoughts and call them back when they 
wander away. God does not demand of those under obedience that 
their thoughts be totally undistracted when they pray. And do not 
lose heart when your thoughts are stolen away. Just remain calm, and 
constantly call your mind back. 

Whoever has secretly vowed not to give up the struggle until his 
verv last breath, to endure a thousand deaths of body and soul, will 
not fall easily into any of these difficulties, for it is inconstancy of 
heart and unfaithfulness to one's place that bring about stumblings 
and disasters. Those who readily go from monastery to monastery are 
totally unfit since nothing is more conducive to barrenness than im- 
patience. 

If you come upon a doctor and a hospital hitherto unknown to 
you, behave like a passerby and quietly examine the expertise of those 
living there. But if you discover that the doctors and the workers in 
that place can cure you of your ailments and, especially, of the spiri- 
tual pride that weighs you down, then go to them, buy your healing 
with the gold of humility, and write your terms in letters of service 
on the parchment of obedience, and let the angels be your witnesses 
as you tear up before them the book of your willfulness. 



112 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



If you wander from place to place, you fritter away the gold with 
which Christ ransomed you. So let the monastery be for you a tomb 
before the tomb. No one can come out of the tomb before the general 
resurrection, and if there be monks who have gone out, then they are 
really dead. Let us beg the Lord not to let this happen to us. 

When the more lazy find orders heavy, they decide that prayer is 
better for them. But when they are given something easy to do they 
run from prayer as if from a conflagration. 

Imagine a particular task. Some leave it aside for the sake of a 
brother's peace of mind, some leave it because they are lazy; but then 
some stay with it out of vainglory and some stay with it out of zeal. 

If, having bound yourself to certain obligations, you become 
aware of the fact that your soul's eye has made no progress, do not 
seek permission to quit. The authentic monk will persevere anywhere 
and the converse is also true. 

In the world, slander has caused many a breakup, but in monas- 
tic communities it is gluttony that brings about all the falls and trans- 
gressions. Keep mistress gluttony under corttrol and every abode will 
then give you dispassion, but let her take hold of you and every place 
outside the grave will be a menace to you. 

The Lord, who makes wise the blind (cf. Ps. 145:8), opens the 
eyes of the obedient to the virtues of their spiritual director and 
blinds them to his faults, but does the opposite to the hater of what is 
good. 

Let what we call quicksilver be a paradigm of perfect obedience. 
Roll it with any substance you wish, and it will nevertheless run to 
the lowest place and mix with nothing defiled. 

The zealous should be especially careful not to condemn the 
easygoing in case they draw down a worse sentence on themselves. 
That, I think, was why Lot was justified. Despite the sort of people he 
lived with, he never seems to have condemned them. 

On every occasion, but especially during the singing of hymns, 
we should be still and undistracted, for it is by means of distractions 
that devils try to make our prayers useless. 

A servant of the Lord^^ stands bodily before men, but mentally 
he is knocking at the gates of heaven with prayer. 

Insults, belittlings, and such like have the bitterness of worm- 
wood for the soul of the novice; praise, honor, approval, are like hon- 



I V , ,i ilr.iii'ii III fliiiri'li W\' iiolf 2-), p, 1(H) 



I i 



JOHN CUMACUS 



ey and give birth to every kind ot swct-incss in pleasure lovers. But 
we should remember the nature of each of them. Wormwood purifies 
all internal filth, while honey increases j,'all. 

Regarding those who have undertaken to care for us in the Lord, 
we should trust them completely, even when they order us to do 
something that looks like being contrary to our salvation. That is the 
time when our faith in them is tested as in a furnace of humiliation, 
and the sign of the most genuine faith is when we obey our superiors 
without hesitation, even when we see the opposite happening to what 
we had hoped. 

From obedience comes humility, as we have already said. And 
from humility comes discernment. That is what the great Cassian has 
said in that marvelously philosophic and sublime chapter of his on 
discernment.^* From discernment comes insight, and from insight 
comes fore.sight. And who would not run this fine race of obedience 
when such blessings are there ahead of him? The good p.salmist had 
this great virtue in mind when he said: "O God, in Your goodness 
You have made ready Your presence in the heart of the poor obedient 
soul"{Ps. 67:10). 

As long as you live, remember that great athlete who for eighteen 
whole years never heard with his outward ears his superior say to 
him, "May you be saved." Yet within him each day he heard from the 
Lord not just, "May you be saved," an uncertain wish, but, "You are 
saved," definite and sure.-''*' 

There are some living in obedience who, on noticing the kind- 
ness and indulgence of their superior, seek his permission to follow 
their own wishes. Phey ought to know that if they get this, they de- 
prive themselves completely of their confessor's crown. Obedience is 
foreign to hypocrisy and willfulness. 

A monk was given an order once. He saw that the intention be- 
hind it was that no pleasure would come to him through having car- 
ried it out. So he asked to be excused. Another monk understood the 
intention but obeyed at once. The question is: Which of them acted 
more piously? 

The devil cannot act contrary to his own will. Those living a 
negligent life, whether alone or in community, should convince you 



34. John Cass\in, Second Conference, ch. 10. 

34a. John the Theban: The Sayings of the Desert Fathers, John the Theban. 



114 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



of this. And if there is a temptation on us to move from a place, let 
that be proof that our life there is pleasing to God. War against us is 
proof that we are making war. 

Now I will not be silent about something that should not be kept 
quiet. It would be against my fellowman to keep to myself what peo- 
ple should know. 

The renowned John the Sabbaite^^ told me things well worth 
hearing. He was detached and was uncontaminated by any falsehood, 
evil word, or bad deed, as you yourself know, holy father, from per- 
sonal experience. 

This is what he told me: "In my monastery in Asia (this good 
man came from there), there was a certain elder who was extremely 
careless and undisciplined. I say this not to pass judgment on him, 
but merely to state the truth. He acquired a disciple — I could not say 
how — a young man called Acacius, good-hearted and sensible, who 
put up with so much from this elder that many will hardly believe it. 
He was tormented daily, not only with insults and indignities, but 
even with blows; and yet he accepted it, tho,ugh not blindly. I would 
see him every day, and his condition was very bad, like that of the 
lowest slave. 1 often spoke to him when I met him. 'What is it. Broth- 
er Acacius? How is it with you today?' He would show me a black 
eye, or a bruised neck or head. Knowing that he was a worker, I used 
to say to him, 'Well done, well done. Put up with it, and it will be for 
your own good.' So for nine years he endured this pitiless elder, and 
then departed to the Lord. Five days after he had been buried in the 
cemetery of the fathers, Acacius's master went to a certain great elder 
living there, and said to him: 'Father, Brother Acacius is dead,' The 
old man answered: 'Elder, I assure you I do not believe it!' 'Come and 
see,' the other said. The elder immediately rose up and went to the 
cemetery with the master of the blessed ascetic. And he called to him 
who in death was truly alive, and he spoke to him as to a living being: 
'Are you dead, Brother Acacius?' And this most obedient man, obedi- 
ent even in death, answered the great elder: 'How could someone tru- 
ly obedient die, Father?' The elder who had been Acacius's master 



.*5. John, formerly of the mona.stery of St. Sabbas in Palestine, is an elder known 
to u.s from I he narratives of Anastasius of Mount Sinai (see F. Nau, "l,e tcMc grec lies 
rccits du moine Anastase sur les saints Peres du Sinai", (hiens Chrislianiis m | \'M)2\ |i[i 
.fH-gy, ^ f> and .14). 



115 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



grew terrified and fell on his face weeping. Later he asked the abbot 
of the Laura36 for a cell near the tomb. He lived devoutly there, and 
to the fathers he used to say; i have committed murder.' " And, Fa- 
ther John, I think that the one who spoke to the dead man was the 
great John himself. For that blessed soul told me another story as 
though about someone else, when in fact it was about himself, as I 
learned afterwards for sure. 

"In the same monastery in Asia," said John, "there was someone 
who became a disciple of a monk who was very meek, gentle, and 
peaceable. When he realized that the elder respected him and cared 
for htm, he decided, quite rightly, that this was something that could 
harm many. So he asked the elder to send him away, and this would 
cause no inconvenience since the elder had another disciple. He went 
away, therefore, and a letter from the elder got him into a monastery 
in Pontus. On his first night there he dreamed that his account was 
being made up, and after he had settled that dreadful reckoning he 
was still in debt to the extent of one hundred pounds of gold. He 
thought about this dream after he had awakened and said, 'Poor An- 
tiochus (for this was his name), you certainly are very far short of 
your debt.' 

" 'And,' he continued, 'after living for three years in total obedi- 
ence in this monastery, despised by everyone, insulted as a foreigner, 
for there was no other foreign monk there, then again 1 had a dream 
in which someone gave me a note crediting me with ten pounds of 
my debt. When I woke up I thought about my dream and said: "Only 
ten! When will I ever pay the rest?" After that 1 said, "Poor Antio- 
chus! Still more hard work and dishonor for you!" Thereafter I pre- 
tended to be a fool,^^ though without neglecting anything of my 
service of everyone. When those pitiless fathers saw that 1 willingly 
served in the same status, they loaded all the heavy work of the mon- 
astery onto me. I spent thirteen years this way, and then in a dream I 
saw those who had appeared to me before, and they gave me a receipt 
to mark full payment of my debt. When, therefore, the monks im- 
posed in any way on me, I remembered my debt and took heart.' " 



3fi, A laura is technically a loo.se community of hermits whose cells open onto an 
alleyway. I'his laura, however, is under an abbot (higoumenos) and is referred to in the 
next paragraph as a cenobium. 

37. Gk exichon. Not the technical word for someone who pretended to be a fool as 
an ascetic discipline (salos), but clearly in the same tradition (cf, Palladius, The I.amiac 
History, ch. 34). 



116 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



So, Father John, the wise John said all this to me as if about 
someone else. That was why he changed his name to Antiochus.^^ 
But in fact it was he who cancelled the bond courageously by his pa- 
tience (cf. Col. 2:14). 

Let us hear what a gift of discernment this holy man obtained 
through his perfect obedience. While he was living in the monastery 
of Saint Sabbas, three young monks came to him wishing to be his 
disciples. He received them gladly and gave them generous hospital- 
ity, for he wanted to refresh them after their long journey. After 
three days he said to them: "Brothers, I am very inclined to fornica- 
tion, and I cannot receive any of you as disciples." But they were not 
scandalized, for they knew the good work of the old man. Yet for all 
that they begged him, they still could not make him change his mind. 
Then, prostrating themselves before him, they begged him at least to 
provide them with a rule by which they might know how and where 
to live. He gave in to their pleas and, understanding well that they 
would accept a rule from him in all humility and obedience, he said to 
one of them: "My son, the Lord wants yoi^ to live in a solitary place 
under the guidance of a spiritual director." To the second he had this 
to say: "Go, sell off your will, hand it over to God, take up your cross, 
and persevere in a community and monastery of brothers. Then you 
will surely have treasure in heaven." To the third he said: "Draw in 
inseparably with your breathing the phrase which says, 'He who per- 
severes to the end will be saved' (Matt. 10:22). 3*' Go now and find, if 
you can, the harshest and strictest trainer in the Lord, and persever- 
ing daily imbibe insult and scorn as if they were milk and honey." 
Then the brother said to the great John: "But if the trainer is some- 
how lax, what then?" This is what the elder replied: "Even if you see 
him fornicating, do not go away from him. Just say to yourself, 'Why 
are you here, friend?' (Matt. 26:50). Then you will see all pride aban- 
don you and lust dry up." 

Those of us who wish to fear the Lord should strive mightily to 
avoid picking up, in the school of virtue, malice and wrongdoing, 
cunning and craftiness, curiosity and anger. It can happen, nor is it 
surprising. When a man is just a private citizen, a sailor, a laborer on 
the land, the enemies of the King do not take up arms against him. 



IH. With a pun on anii-ocheo, "to bear adversities." 

jy, An early instance of linking prayer with breathing, but not yet culiivated as u 
(echnii|uc. 



117 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



But when they see him accept the King's seal,*'' the shield, the dagger, 
the sword, the bow, the uniform of a soldier, then they gnash their 
teeth and do all they can to destroy him. So let us not be caught nap- 
ping. 

I have seen innocent lovely children come to school for wisdom, 
education, and profit, and learn only cunning and vice through the 
contact they make with other students. The wise man will under- 
stand what I am saying. 

Those striving completely to learn a craft make daily progress. It 
has to be so. But some know how they are progressing. Others, by di- 
vine providence, do not know. Now a good banker never lets an eve- 
ning pass without his reckoning profit and loss. However, he can 
have no clear picture of this unless he makes hourly entries in his rec- 
ord books. For it is the hourly account that yields the daily account. 

A silly person feels hurt when accused or shouted at. He tries to 
answer back or else at once apologizes to his accuser, not for reasons 
of humility but to put a stop to his reproaches. In fact you should be 
silent when ridiculed. Accept patiently these spiritual cauterizations, 
or rather, purifying flames. And when the doctor has done his work, 
ask him to forgive you, for he may not accept your apology when he 
is angry. 

Those of us who live in community must fight by the hour 
against ail the passions and especially against these two: a mania for 
gluttony and bad temper. There is plenty of food for these passions in 
a community. 

The devil proposes impossible virtues to those who live under 
obedience, and unsuitable ideas to those living in solitude. If you look 
at the thinking of inexperienced novices living under obedience, you 
will find ideas out of step with one another — desire for stillness, for 
extreme fasting, for unbroken prayer, for total freedom from vanity, 
for continual remembrance of death, for unceasing compunction, for 
absolute release from anger, for deep silence, for outstanding purity. 
And should they happen by divine providence to be without these at 
the start, they rush vainly toward a different life because they have 
been deceived. The enemy persuades them to look too soon for these 



40. Soldiers were branded or tattooed. The "seal" (sphrugidu) also alludes to the seal 
of bapti.sm; cf. John Chrysostom, Horn. .?, 7 in !! Cor. (PC 6\, 41«), where the coinparisuii 
is made explicit. 



118 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



virtues, so that they may not persevere and attain them in due time. 
And to those living in solitude, the deceiver heaps praise on the hospi- 
tality of those living under obedience, on their service, their brother- 
ly love, their community living, their visits to the sick. What the devil 
is trying to do is to make both restless. 

Very few are able to live in solitude. This is really so. Indeed 
only those can do so whose labors have been encouraged by God and 
whose struggles have received His help. 

We should analyze the nature of our passions and of our obedi- 
ence, so as to choose our director accordingly. If lust is your problem, 
do not pick for your trainer a worker of miracles who has a welcome 
and a meal for everyone. Choose instead an ascetic who will reject 
any of the consolation of food. If you are arrogant, let him be tough 
and unyielding, not gentle and accommodating. We should not be on 
the lookout for those gifted with foreknowledge and foresight, but 
rather for those who are truly humble and whose character and 
dwelling place match our weaknesses. And remember the example of 
the righteous Abbacyrus, mentioned above. 'Adopt the fine habit, so 
conducive to obedience, of always assuming that the superior is test- 
ing you, and you will not be far wrong. If you are constantly upbraid- 
ed by your director and thus acquire great faith in him and love for 
him, then you may be sure that the Holy Spirit has taken up resi- 
dence invisibly in your soul and the power of the Most High has 
overshadowed you. But you must not boast or celebrate when you 
manage to be brave under insults and indignities. Rather should you 
mourn for having earned criticism and for having stirred your direc- 
tor to anger against you. And what I am going to say to you now 
must not shock you. (In any case I have the support of Moses in this.) 
It is better to sin against God than against our father. If we make God 
angry, our director can reconcile Him to us. But if he is angry, then 
there is no one to speak up for us before God. And in any case, the 
two situations are really the same. Or so it seems to me. 

Let us be vigilant and very carefully and prudently decide when 
we should gladly and silently endure accusations made against us to 
our pastor, and when we ought to speak up for ourselves to him. I 
think we should always be silent when some indignity is offered to 
us, since we can profit from that. But where another person is in- 
volved we should make a defense so as to keep unbroken the bond of 
love and peace. 



iiy 



JOHN CI.IMACUS 



Those who havL' lirokcii iiwny from obedience will insist on its 
value, for only then huve ihey liilly understood the heaven in which 
they were living. 

He who strives for dispassion ;nui for (;<>d considers lost any day 
on which he was not criticized. Like Irccs swayed by the wind and 
driving their roots deeper into the ground, those who live in obedi- 
ence become strong and unshakable souls. 

When a monk living in solitude has reali/,ed what his weak point 
IS, and when he changes place and sells himself to obedience, then, 
blind as he was once, he recovers sight and can see Christ without dif- 
ficulty. 

So then, keep running, brother athletes, and again I say to you, 
keep running. Listen to the cry of wisdom: "The Lord has tried them' 
like gold in a furnace," or, rather, in a community, "and he has re- 
ceived them as burnt offerings into his bo.som" (Wisd. 3:6). Glory and 
eternal dominion are His, in company with the eternal Father and 
the holy and adorable Spirit. Amen. 

This step is of equal number with the evangelists. Keep running, 
athlete, and do not be afraid. 



120 



Step S 



ON PENITENCE 



Once John outran Peter, and now obedience is placed before re- 
pentance. For the one who arrived first represents obedience, the oth- 
er repentance.*' 

Repentance is the renewal of baptism and is a contract with God 
for a fresh start in life. Repentance goes shopping for humility and is 
ever distrustful of bodily comfort. Repentance is critical awareness 
and a sure watch over oneself. Repentance is the daughter of hope 
and the refusal to despair. (The penitent stands guilty — but undis- 
graced.) Repentance is reconciliation with the Lord by the perfor- 
mance of good deeds which are the opposites of the sins. It is the 
purification of conscience and the voluntary endurance of affliction. 
The penitent deals out his own punishment, for repentance is the 
fierce persecution of the stomach and the flogging of the soul into in- 
tense awareness. 

Come, gather round, listen here and I will speak to all of you 
who have angered the Lord. Crowd around me and see what he has 
revealed to my soul for your edification. 

Let us give first place to the story of the dishonored workers — 
who still earned respect. Let us listen, take heed, and act — we who 
may have suffered an unexpected fail. Rise up and be seated, all you 



•II. In Railcr's tt-xl xh\s scnttnt'c \s aitai-hcd Id llic i-nd t)t Stri> 4 



121 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



who have been laid low by your sins. Hear what I have to say, my 
brothers. Listen, all you who long to be reconciled with God again in 
a true conversion. 

I, the weakling, heard that there was a great and strange way of 
life and lowliness for those living in a separate monastery called "The 
Prison." It was under the authority of that man, that light of lights, 
referred to above, and during my visit I asked the good man to let me 
see it. This great man, who wished never to cause grief to any soul, 
gave his permission. 

I went therefore to that abode of penitents, to that place of true 
grief, and if I may be so bold as to say so, I actually saw what the eye 
of an inattentive man never saw, what the ear of a lackadaisical man 
never heard, what never entered the heart of a sluggard (cf. I Cor. 
2:9). I saw things done and said that could only draw down the mercy 
of God, deeds and attitudes of body that quickly win His love for 
men. 

I 1 saw some of those accused yet innocent men stand all night un- 
(til dawn in the open air, their feet never moving, pitifully pounded 
by the natural urge to sleep, giving themselves no rest, reproaching 
themselves, driving sleep away with abuse and insults. 

Others raised their eyes to heaven, wept, cried, and implored 
help from there. 

Others prayed with their hands tied behind their backs, like 
criminals, their faces blackened with grief and bent earthward, since 
they thought themselves unworthy to look up to heaven. Overcome 
by their reflections and the weight of conscience, they could not 
speak, could not pray to God, could not even make a beginning of 
prayer; and filled, as it seemed, with darkness and empty despair, 
they could offer God only a blank soul and a wordless mind. / 

Others sat in sackcloth and ashes on the ground, hiding their 
faces between their knees, striking the earth with their foreheads. 

Others constantly beat their breasts, recalling their past lives and 
the condition of their souls. Some shed their tears on the ground, 
while others, unable to weep, struck themselves. Some raised over 
their own souls a lament for the dead, since the strength to bear their 
heart's grief had left them. Others moaned inwardly, stifling the 
sounds of their wailing until, unable to bear it any longer, they would 
suddenly cry out. 

I saw men who in look and disposition seemed out of their 
minds, made dumb by the complete darkness of their despair, insensi- 



ble to the life around them, their minds sunk in the depths of humil- 
ity, their eyes' tears dried up in the fire of despondency. 

Others sat in deep thought with gaze rooted to the earth. Their 
heads were moving constantly. Like lions they roared and moaned 
from their innermost depths. Some were full of hope as they begged 
complete forgiveness, while others, out of extreme humility, con- 
demned themselves as being unworthy to be forgiven and wailed that 
it was not in their power to justify themselves before God. Some im- 
plored the Lord to punish them here and to show mercy in the next 
life. Others, weighed down by the burden of conscience, would say in 
all sincerity, "We are unworthy of heaven, but to be spared from fu- 
ture punishment will satisfy us." 

I saw there humble and contrite souls who were saddened by the 
weight of their burden. The stones themselves would have been 
moved to pity by their voices and by their cries to God. Looking 
down to the ground, they would say this: "We know, we know that 
we deserve every punishment and every torment. Rightly so. How 
could we make up for all that we owe, even i£ we had the entire world 
there to weep for us? All we ask, all we pray for, all we implore is that 
'in Your anger You do not rebuke us or chasten us in Your wrath' (Ps. 
6:2). Be sparing. It is enough for us if You deliver us from Your great 
threat and from unknown and hidden torments. We dare not ask for 
complete forgiveness. How could we, when we have failed to keep 
our vow unstained, but after all Your past laving kindness and for- 
giveness have defiled it?" 

The words of David could surely be seen to be fulfilled there, for 
there were men in hardship and bowed down to the end of their lives, 
going about each day in sadness, their bodies' wounds stinking of rot- 
tenness (Ps. 37:6-7) and yet unnoticed by them. They forgot to eat 
their bread; their drink was mixed with tears. They ate dust and ashes 
instead of bread; their bones stuck to their flesh and they were dried 
up like grass (Ps. 101:4-12). The only words you could hear from 
them were these; "Woe, woe, alas, alas! It is just, it is just. Spare us, 
spare us, O Lord." Some said, "Be merciful, be merciful"; others, 
more sadly: "Forgive us. Lord, forgive us if it is possible." 

\'ou could see the tongues on some of them dry and hanging 
from their mouths in the manner of dogs. Some punished them.selvcs 
in the bla/.ing sun, others tortured themselves in the cold, while oth- 
ers, again, drank only as much water as would keep them from dylny 
of thirst. Some munched on a bit of bread, flung away what whn Icfr 



122 



I.M 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



of it and proclaimed themselves unworthy to be fed like human be- 
ings since they had behaved like animals. 

Would you witness any laughter among them? Idle talk? Irrita- 
tion? Anger? No, indeed. They no longer knew what it was for a man 
to be angry, for grief had done away with their capacity for rage. 

Where was quarreling among them? Or merrymaking? Or bold 
speech? Or concern for the body? Where among them was any trace 
of vanity, or longing for comfort, or the thought of wine, or the taste 
of fresh fruit, or the enjoyment of cooked food, or the pleasing of the 
palate? The fact was that even the hope of such things in this world 
had been extinguished in them. 

Did any of them worry about earthly things? Or pass judgment 
on anyone? Certainly not. 

These were the shouts and cries they raised to the Lord without 
ceasing. Striking their breasts, as though standing before the gates of 
heaven, some would say to God; "Open up to us, O Judge! Open up! 
We have shut ourselves out with our sins. Open up to us!" Others 
would say, "Just show the light of Your face and we will be saved" 
(Ps. 79:4). Another would say: "Give light to those sitting humbly in 
darkness and in the shadow of death" (Luke 1:79). Another would say, 
"Ah, Lord, let Your mercy go speeding before us (Ps. 78:8) for we 
have perished in despair and have fallen completely away." Some 
said: "Will the Lord ever again show the light of His face to us?" (Ps. 
66:2) and others, "Will our souls survive the unbearable debt?" (Ps. 
123:5), while yet others said, "Will the Lord be moved at last to have 
mercy on us? (Judges 2:18). Will we ever hear him say to those of us in 
endless bondage, 'Come forth' (Isa. 49:9) and to those of us in the hell 
of penance, 'Be forgiven'? Has our cry come to the ears of the Lord?" 

All of them sat ceaselessly contemplating death, saying, "How 
will it go for us? What will be the verdict on us? How will life end for 
us? Will we receive pardon? Will there be forgiveness for those in 
darkness, for the lowly, for the convicted? Is our prayer vigorous 
enough to come before the face of the Lord, or has it been rejected— 
and rightly so — for being worthless and shameful? Or, if it came as 
far as the Lord, how much could it sway Him? Would it be success- 
ful? Powerful? Profitable? Effective? Coming as it does from unclean 
lips and bodies, it does not have much power. Would our prayer rec- 
oncile us completely with the Judge or only in part, only to the extent 
of half our wounds, which are very great and require much sweat and 
hard work? Are the guardian angels standing by us, or are they still at 



124 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



a great distance? For until they come close to us, our efforts are vain 
and futile. Our prayer has neither the power of access nor the wings 
of purity to reach the Lord, unless our angels draw near to us and 
take it and bring it to the Lord." 

With failing confidence, they would often speak to one another 
as follows: "Brothers, are we getting anywhere? Will we be granted 
what we ask? Will the Lord accept us once more? Will He open up to 
us?" Others would answer: "As our brothers the Ninevites said, Who 
knows if God will change His mind (Jon. 3:9) and deliver us from 
mighty punishment? Let us do what we can. If He opens the door, 
well and good; if not, then blessed be the Lord God Who in His jus- 
tice has shut the door on us. At least we should continue to knock at 
the door as long as we live. Maybe He will open to us on account of 
our persistence." And so they encouraged one another, saying, "We 
must run, brothers, we must run. We have to run very hard because 
we have fallen behind our holy company. So let us run, driving on 
this foul and wicked flesh of ours, killing it as it has killed us." 

And that precisely is what these holy mfen who had been called to 
account were doing. With knees like wood, as a result of all the pros- 
trations, with eyes dimmed and sunken, with hair gone and cheeks 
wasted and scalded by many hot tears, with faces pale and worn, they 
jwere no different from corpses. Their breasts were livid from all the 
I beatings, which had even made them spit blood. There was no rest 
■for them in beds, no clean and laundered clothing. They were bedrag- 
jgled, dirty, and verminous. Compared with this, what are the suffer- 
ings of the possessed, of those mourning the dead, of the exiled, or of 
those condemned for murder? These are suffering involuntary tor- 
ture and punishment. But this is nothing in comparison with suffer- 
ings deliberately sought. 

Believe me, brothers, I am not making all this u p. 
Often they came to the great judge, to that angel among men — I 
mean the shepherd — and they would plead with him to put irons and 
chains on their hands and necks, to bind their legs in the stocks and 
not to release them until death — or even afterwards.*^ 

I will certainly not pass over the marvelous humility of these 



42. The body nf a monk named Sarapion ha.s been discovered in Egypt wearing ii 
collar, bell, bracclci.s and anklets of iron (Palladiu.s, The t.ausiac History, cd, Hiitlcr, vol 
ii, (). 21^ note h't). Snob practicfs, however, were unusual in Kgypi, alihiiUKh eoiiuiioii 
in carlv Svriaii iiioiia.stici.sni. 



125 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



holy men, their contrite love for God, and their penance. When one 
of these good citizens of the land of repentance was about to die and 
to stand before the impartial Judge, when he saw that his end was 
near, he would implore the man in charge of them with oaths to in- 
tercede with the abbot on his behalf and to beg that he be denied hu- 
man burial, but that he be flung into a river bed, like some dumb 
animal, or thrown to the wild beasts in the field. And often the abbot, 
that great discerning light, would give instructions that the dead be 
carried away without the singing of psalms or without any sort of re- 
spect shown. 

The last hour of one of these was fearful to behold. When the 
penitents in the prison learned that one of their number was finish- 
ing his course and going on ahead of them, they would gather round 
while his mind was still working. Thirsty, tearful, and sad, they 
would look at him compassionately, shaking their heads, racked with 
tenderness, and they would speak to the dying man: "Brother and fel- 
low penitent, how is it with you? What will you say? What are your 
hopes and expectations? Have you achieved what you worked for so 
hard, or have you not? Has the door been opened to you, or are you 
still under sentence? Did you reach your goal, or did you fail? Has 
any kind of assurance come to you, or are you still uncertain in your 
hopes? Are you free at last, or does darkness and doubt still hang over 
your thoughts? Have you sensed any illumination in your heart, or is 
it still in darkness and dishonor? Did you hear an inner voice saying, 
'You are made whole' (John 5:14) or 'Your sins are forgiven you' 
(Matt. 9:2) or 'Your faith has saved you' (Mark 5:34)? Or did~4^ voice 
say, 'Let sinners be cast into hell' (Ps. 9:18); 'Bind him hand and^oot, 
and throw him into the darkness outside' (Matt. 22:13); 'Let the wick- 
ed man be expelled so that he may not see the glory of the Lord' (Isa. 
26:10)? Can you say anything to us, brother? Please tell us, so that we 
may know how it will be for us. Your time is over and you will never 
have another chance." Some of the dying would answer: "Blessed be 
God Who has not turned away my prayer nor His mercy from me" 
(Ps. 65:20). Others would say, "Blessed be the Lord Who has not given 
us a prey to their teeth" (Ps. 123:6). But others would be sad and say: 
"Will our soul pass through the impassable water of the spirits of the 
air?" (Ps. 123:5). These would be unsure, and would be worried about 
the rendering of accounts after death. And more sadly yet, others 
would say; "Woe to the soul that has not kept its vow unblemished! In 



126 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



this hour, and in this one only, it will discover what is prepared for 
it." 

I came close to despair when I had seen and heard all this among 
them and when I had compared my own indifference with what they 
went through. W hat a dreadful place they li ved in! It was dark, slink- 
ing, fil thy, and squalid . To call it a prison or house of convicts was an 
accurate description. Just the sight of it would teach you penitence 
and mourning. 

Yet what for some is hard and unbearable is easy and tolerable 
for those who have fallen away from virtue and spiritual treasures. A 
soul that has lost its one-time confidence and abandoned its hope of 
dispassion, that has broken the seal of chastity, that has squandered 
the treasury of divine graces, that has become a stranger to divine 
consolation, that has rejected the Lord's command, that has extin- 
guished the beautiful fire of spiritual tears*^ — and that is wounded 
and pierced by sorrow as it remembers all this — will not only take on 
the labors mentioned above with all eagerness, but will even decide 
devoutly to kill itself with penitential works.^It will do so if there is in 
it only the tiniest spark of love or of fear of the Lord. And of such a 
kind were these blessed men. Remembering all this, thinking of the 
heights of virtue from which they had fallen, they would say: "We re- 
member the old days (Ps. 142:5) and that fire of our zeal." Some 
would cry to God, "Where are Your old mercies. Lord, which in 
Your truth You would reveal to our souls? Remember the reproach 
and the hardship of Your servants" (Ps. 88:50-5 1). Another would say: 
"Ah, I wish 1 were back as I used to be in the months of the days 
when God watched over me, when the lamp of His light shone over 
the head of my heart" (Job 29:2-3). 

They would think of their former achievements and, weeping for 
them as though they were children that had died, they would say: 
"Where is the purity of my prayer? The confidence that was in it? 
Where are the sweet tears, instead of these bitter ones? Where is that 
hope of perfect chastity and purification? Where is that expectation of 
blessed dispassion? Where is my faith in the shepherd? Where is the 
result of his prayer for us? It is all lost and gone, as though it had nev- 
er appeared. It has vanished as though it had never been there." 

Some prayed to be possessed by devils, others that they might be- 



41, Suiiii.- MSS ciiiiil 



spinui;il 



127 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



come epileptics. Some wished for blindness so that they might be a 
pitiful spectacle, others sought paralysis so that they might not have 
to suffer later. And I, my friends, was so pleased by their grief that I 
was carried away, enraptured, unable to contain myself. But I must 
return to my discourse. 

For all that I am impatient by nature, I stayed thirty days in that 
prison before returning to the main monastery and to its great shep- 
herd. He noticed that I was very much changed and that I had yet to 
recover my former self. He understood what the change meant, for he 
was a very wise man. "So, Father John," he said, "you saw how these 
men were struggling?" 

"I saw them. Father, and I was amazed," I replied. "It seems to 
me that those who have fallen and are penitent are more blessed than 
those who have never fallen and who do not have to mourn over 
themselves, because through having fallen, they have pulled them- 
selves up by a sure resurrection." 

"That is how it is," he said, and he told me this true story: "I had 
a brother here about ten years ago, and he was very active and enthu- 
siastic. When I saw how zealous he was, I really trembled for him in 
case the devil, in envy, should trip his foot against an obstacle as he 
sped along — something that can happen to those in a hurry. And in 
fact it happened that way. One evening, late, he came to me, showed 
me an open wound, looked for a dressing, requested cauterization, 
and was in a very alarmed state. The physician did not wish to make 
too deep an incision, for the man deserved sympathy. But when the 
brother saw this, he flung himself on the ground, clasped my feet, 
moistened them with copious tears, and asked to be shut up in the 
prison you have seen. 'It is impossible for me to avoid going there,' he 
cried, and — something most unusual among the sick4-he pleaded 
with the physician to change his kindness to harshnesi, and he hur- 
ried off to become a companion and fellow sufferer among the peni- 
tents. The grief that comes from loving God pierced his heart like a 
sword, and on the eighth day he died, having asked not to be given 
burial. But I brought him here and had him buried among the fathers, 
as he had deserved, because after his week of slavery he had been 
freed on the eighth day. And let me tell you that someone surely 
knows that he did not rise up from my foul and wretched feet before 
he had won God's favor. It is not to be wondered at, for having re- 
ceived in his heart the faith of the gospel harlot, he moistened my 



128 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN'I 



humble feet with the same trust. Everything is possible for the believ- 
er, said the Lord (cf. Mark 9:23). I have watched impure souls mad for 
physical love but turning what they know of such love into a reason 
for penance and transferring that same capacity for love to the Lord. 
I have watched them master fear so as to drive themselves unsparing- 
ly toward the love of God, That is why, when talking of that chaste 
harlot, the Lord does not say, 'because she feared,' but rather, 'be- 
cause she loved much' she was able to drive out love with love" (Luke 
7:47). 

Now I know well, my friends, that these labors I have described 
will seem unbelievable to some, unattainable to others, and be a 
source of despair to others still. Yet they will actually be an incentive 
to a brave soul, a fiery blast, so that he will go away with zeal in his 
heart, whereas the man who feels a great incapacity in himself will 
understand his own weakness, be humbled easily by the reproach he 
levels against himself, and will at least try to follow the soul who is 
brave. And I am not at all sure but that he may even overtake him. 
But the careless man had better stay away fr9m my stories, for other- 
wise he may fall into despair, throw away the little he has achieved, 
and prove to be like the man of whom it was said: "From the man 
who has no eagerness, even that which he seems to have will be taken 
away" (cf. Matt. 25:29). It is impossible for those of us who have fallen 
into the sink of iniquity ever to be drawn out of it unless we also 
plumb the depths of the humility shown by the penitent. 

The sad humility of penitents is one thing. The reproach of con- 
science of those who are still sinners is another. The blessed treasure 
of humility that, with God's help, the perfect manage to attain is yet 
another. And we should be in no hurry to find words adequate to this 
third kind of humility, for our effort will be useless. But a sign of the 
second kind is the perfect bearing of indignity. 

An old habit often dominates even someone who mourns. No 
wonder, for the judgments visited by God and our own lapses make 
up a list hard to understand, and it is impossible to be sure which of 
our failings are due to carelessness, which are due to the fact that God 
permitted them, and which arise from God's having turned away 
from us, I have been told, however, that lapses occurring as a result of 
divine providence cause us to repent swiftly, since He Who delivers 
us docs not permit us to i)e held captive for long. But above all wc 
mu.st fight off the demon of dejection whenever we happen lo slip, 



12'^ 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



for he comes right beside us when we are praying and reminds us of 
our former good standing with God and tries to divert us from our 
prayer. 

Do not be surprised if you fall every day and do not surrender. 
Stand your ground bravely. And you may be sure that your guardian 
angel will respect your endurance. A fresh, warm wound is easier to 
heal than those that are old, neglected, and festering, and that need 
extensive treatment, surgery, bandaging, and cauterization. Long ne- 
glect can render many of them incurable. However, all things are 
possible with God (Matt. 19:26). 

God is merciful before a fall, inexorable after — so the demons 
say. And when you have sinned, pay no attention to him who says in 
regard to minor failings: "If only you had not committed that major 
fault! This is nothing by comparison." The truth is that very often 
small gifts soften the great anger of the Judge. 

He who really keeps track of what he has done will consider as 
lost every day during which he did not mourn, regardless of whatever 
good he may happen to have done. 

Let no one who grieves for his sins expect reassurance at the 
hour of death. There can be no assurance about the unknown. "Spare 
me before I depart from here, unsure of my salvation" (Ps. 38:14). 

Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there the chains of sin are let 
loose; where there is real humility, all bonds are made free; but those 
without the one or the other should not be deceived: they are in bond- 
age. Those living in the world, and they alone, are without these two 
assurances, especially the first, unless, through almsgiving, some so 
run their race that they know at the moment of death how much they 
have gained. 

He who weeps for himself will not be wrapped up in the grief, 
lapse, or reproach of someone else, A dog injured by a wild animal 
becomes all the more maddened against it and is driven to implacable 
.rage by the pain of the injury. 

We ought to be on our guard, in case our conscience has stopped 
troubling us, not so much because of its being clear but because of its 
being immersed in sin. 

A proof of our having been delivered from our failings is the un- 
ceasing acknowledgement of our indebtedness. 

Nothing equals the mercy of God or surpasses it. To despair is 
therefore to inflict death on oneself. 



130 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



A sign of true repentance is the admission that all our troubles, 
and more besides, whether visible or not, were richly deserved. 

After Moses had seen God in the bush, he went back to Egypt, 
that is, to the darkness and the brick making of Pharaoh, who is to be 
understood here in a spiritual sense. But he returned to the bush. And 
not only to the bush, but to the mountaintop. For anyone who has 
experienced contemplation will never despair of himself. The great 
Job became a beggar, but afterwards he became twice as rich. 

If you have no courage, if you are lazy, then lapses that occur 
after entering religious life are hard to bear. They wipe out the hope 
of dispassion and they make us imagine that true blessedness is sim- 
ply to rise from the pit of sin. But note well that we never return by 
the road on which we strayed, but rather by a different and a shorter 
route. 

I saw two men traveling the same route to the Lord, and at the 
same time. One of them was older, and had worked harder. The oth- 
er, his disciple, soon overtook him and was first to arrive at the sepul- 
chre of humility. < 

All of us— but especially the lapsed— should be especially careful 
not to be afflicted with the disease of the godless Origen.*-* This foul 
disease uses God's love for man as an excuse and is very welcome to 
those who are lovers of pleasure. 

In my meditation, or more accurately, in my acts of repentance, a 
fire of prayer will burn and will consume everything material. Let 
the holy prisoners, described above, be a rule for you, a pattern, a 
model, a true picture of repentance, so that for as long as you live you 
will have no need of a treatise; until at last Christ, the divine Son of 
God, will enlighten you in the resurrection of true repentance. 
Amen. 

Through repentance you have reached the fifth step. You have, 
in this way, purified the five senses, and by choosing to accept pun- 
ishment have thereby avoided the punishment that is involuntary. 



44, I.e., thai all would finally Ik- saved. The teaching of Ori^jen U: \H'i ,•. i'i-i) mi 
univiTsal .Siilviition was eontlonineci ai the f-'iffh Kcurnenical CiitJticil (SSI) 



n 



Step 6 



ON REMEMBRANCE OF DEATH 



As thought comes before speech, so the remembrance of death 
and of sin comes before weeping and mourning. It is therefore appro- 
priate to deal now with this theme. 

To be reminded of death each day is to die each day; to remember 
one's departure from life is to provoke tears by the hour. Fear of 
death is a property of nature due to disobedience, but terror of death 
is a sign of unrepented sins. Christ is frightened of dying but not ter- 
rified, thereby clearly revealing the properties of His two natures. 

just as bread is the most necessary of all foods, so the thought of 
death is the most essential of all works. The remembrance of death 
brings labors and meditations, or rather, the sweetness of dishonor to 
those living in community, whereas for those living away from turbu- 
lence it produces freedom from daily worries and breeds constant 
prayer and guarding of the mind, virtues that are the cause and the 
effect of the thought of death. 

Tin has a way of looking like silver but is of course quite distinct; 
and for those with some discernment, the difference between natural 
and contranatural fear of death is most obvious. You can clearly sin- 
gle out those who hold the thought of death at the center of their be- 
ing, for they freely withdraw from everything created and they 
renounce their own will. 

The man who lives daily with the thought of death is to be ad- 
mired, and the man who gives himself to it by the hour is surely ,\ 



132 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



saint. And yet not every desire for death is good. A habitual sinner 
prays humbly for death, but the man who does not want to change his 
ways may, in sheer despair, actually long for death. And there are 
some who out of conceit consider themselves to be dispassionate, and 
for a while they have no fear of death, while a rare few hunger to 
leave by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. 

Some, because they are puzzled, ask the following question: "If 
the remembrance of death is so good for us, why has God concealed 
from us the knowledge of when we will die?" In putting such a ques- 
tion, they fail to realize how marvelously God operates to save us. No 
one who knew in advance the hour of his death would accept baptism 
or join a monastery long before it, but instead would pass all his time 
in sin and would be baptized and do penance only on the day of his 
demise. Habit would make him a confirmed and quite incorrigible 
sinner.**^ 

When you are lamenting your sins, do not ever admit that cur 
which suggests that God is soft-hearted toward men. (Such a notion 
may on occasion be of help to you when you see yourself being 
dragged down into deep despair.) For the aim of the enemy is to di- 
vert you from your mourning and from that fear of God which, how- 
ever, is free from fear. 

The man who wants to be reminded constantly of death and of 
God's judgment and who at the same time gives in to material cares 
and distractions, is like someone trying at the same time to swim and 
to clap his hands. 

If your remembrance of death is clear and specific, you will cut 
down on your eating; and if, in your humility, you reduce the amount 
you eat, your passions will be correspondingly reduced. 

To have an insensitive heart is to be dulled in mind, and food in 
abundance dries up the well of tears. Thirst, however, and the keep- 
ing of vigils afflict the heart; and when the heart is stirred, then the 
tears may run. Now all this may sound disgusting to the gluttonous 
and unbelievable to the sluggish, but a man pursuing the active life 
will try this course and the experience will make him smile, whereas 
the one who is still casting about him will become even more de- 
pressed. 

I'he [''athers assert that perfect love is sinless. And it seems lo ine 
that in the same way a perfect .sen.sc of death is free from fear. 

44ii I liis wtitLMU'i' i>i n<ii in Riulcr's lest, 



\ \ 



JOHN CUMACUS 



There are many things that the mind of a man leading the active 
life can do. One can think about the love of God, the remembrance of 
death, the remembrance of God, the remembrance of the kingdom, 
the zeal of the holy martyrs, the remembrance of the presence of God 
as described in the saying, "I saw the Lord before me" (Ps. 15:8), the 
remembrance of the holy and spiritual powers, the remembrance of 
death, judgment, punishment, and sentence. The list begins with the 
sublime and ends with that which never fails. 

This is what an Egyptian monk once said to me: "If it ever hap- 
pened that I was inclined to offer some comfort to this carcass of 
mine, the remembrance of death that had been so firmly established 
in my heart would stand before me like a judge; and — a wonderful 
thing — even if I wanted to push it aside, I simply could not do so." 
Another monk, this time an inhabitant of the place called Tholas,'*^ 
would go into an ecstasy at the thought of death, and when the broth- 
ers found him they had to raise him up and carry him, scarcely 
breathing, like someone who had fainted or had suffered an epileptic 
fit. And I must certainly tell you about Hesychius the Horebite. All 
his life he was careless and he paid not the slightest attention to his 
soul. Then a very grievous illness came on him, so that he was for a 
whole hour absent from the body. After he had revived, he begged us 
all to go away at once, built up the door of his cell, and remained 
twelve years inside without ever speaking to anyone and taking only 
bread and water. He never stirred and was always intent on what it 
was he had seen in his ecstasy. He never moved and had the look of 
someone out of his mind. And, silently, he wept warm tears. But 
when he was on the point of death, we broke in and we asked him 
many questions. All he would say was this: "Please forgive me. No 
one who has acquired the remembrance of death will ever be able to 
sin." It astonished us to see the blessed change and transformation 
that had taken place in someone hitherto so negligent. We buried him 
reverently in the cemetery near the fort;**^ and, some days later, when 
we looked for his holy remains, we could not find them. Such had 
been the marvel of his repentance that the Lord demonstrated to us 



45. At the foot of Mount Sinai about five miles from the fort, St, John Climacii'- 
spent fortv vears there as a solitary (see the Preface, pp. 4-.';). 

46. The fort was built in 556-7 to protect the monk.s of Sinai from dtscri raiilers. 
It is the present-dav monastery of St. Catherine. 



134 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



that fact that He accepts those who wish to make amends, even after 
the most prolonged negligence on their part. 

Just as some declare that the abyss is infinite, for they call it a 
bottomless pit, so the thought of death is limitless and brings with it 
chastity and activity. The saint mentioned above proved this. Men 
like him unceasingly pile fear on fear, and never stop until the very 
strength in their bones is worn out. 

We may be sure that remembrance of death, like every other 
blessing, is a gift from God. How else can you explain the fact that 
often we can be dry-eyed and hard at a cemetery, yet full of compunc- 
tion when we are nowhere near such a place? 

The man who has died to all things remembers death, but whoev- 
er holds some ties with the world will not cease plotting against him- 
self. 

Do not search about for the words to show people you love them. 
Instead, ask God to show them your love without your having to talk 
about it. Otherwise you will never have time enough both for loving 
gestures and for compunction. , 

Do not deceive yourself, foolish worker, into thinking that one 
time can make up for another. The day is not long enough to allow 
you to repay in full its debt to the Lord, 

Someone has said that you cannot pass a day devoutly unless you 
think of it as your last. Even the Greeks have said some such thing, 
because they describe philosophy as meditation on death. 

This, then, is the sixth step. He who has climbed it will never 
sin. "Remember your last end, and you will never sin" (Ecclus, 7:36), 



135 



Step 7 



ON MOURNING 



Mourning which is according to God is a melancholy of the soul, 
a disposition of an anguished heart that passionately seeks what it 
thirsts for, and when it fails to attain it, pursues it diligently and fol- 
lows behind it lamenting bitterly. 

Alternatively, mourning is a golden spur within a soul that has 
been stripped of all bonds and ties, set by holy sorrow to keep watch 
over the heart. 

Compunction is an eternal torment of the conscience which 
brings about the cooling of the fire of the heart through silent confes- 
sion. 

Confession is a forgetfulness of nature, since because of this a 
man forgot to eat his bread (cf. Ps. 101:5). 

Repentance is a cheerful renunciation of every creature comfort. 

Those making some progress in blessed mourning are usually 
temperate and untalkative. Those who have succeeded in making real 
progress do not become angry and do not bear grudges. As for the 
perfect — these are humble, they long for dishonor, they look out for 
involuntary sufferings, they do not condemn sinners and they are in- 
ordinately compassionate. The first kind are acceptable, the second 
praiseworthy, but blessed surely are those who hunger for suffering 
and thirst for dishonor, for they will be filled to abundance with the 
food that cannot satiate them. 



136 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



If you are endowed with mourning, hold fast to it with all your 
strength, for it can easily be lost if it is not well secured. Like wax 
melting near fire, it can easily be dissolved by noise, worldly cares, 
and luxury, but, in particular, by garrulity and frivolity. 

The tears that come after baptism are greater than baptism itself, 
though it may seem rash to say so. Baptism washes off those evils that 
were previously within us, whereas the sins committed after baptism 
are washed away by tears. The baptism received by us as children we 
have all defiled, but we cleanse it anew with our tears. If God in His 
love for the human race had not given us tears, those being saved 
would be few indeed and hard to find. 

Groans and sadness cry out to the Lord, trembling tears inter- 
cede for us, and the tears shed out of all-holy love show that our 
prayer has been accepted. 

If nothing befits mourning as much as humility, certainly noth- 
ing opposes it as much as laughter. 

Hold fast to the blessed and joyful sorrow of holy compunction 
and do not cease laboring for it until it lifts.you high above the things 
of the world to present you, a cleansed offering, to Christ. 

Never stop imagining and examining the abyss of dark fire,*' its 
cruel minions, the merciless inexorable judge, the limitless chaos of 
subterranean flame, the narrow descents down to underground 
chambers and yawning gulfs, and other such images. Then lust in our 
souls may be checked by immense terror, by surrender to incorrupt- 
ible chastity, and receive that non-material light which shines beyond 
all fire. 

When you pray and plead, tremble like a convict standing before 
a judge. The way you look and the disposition of your heart may 
overcome the anger of the just Judge. He will not turn away from the 
widowed soul standing before Him, burdened with sorrow and wea- 
rying the Tireless One (cf. Luke 18:5). 

He who has the gift of spiritual tears will be able to mourn any- 
where. But if it is all outward show, there will be no end to his discus- 
sion of places and means. Hidden treasure is more secure than that 
which is exposed in the marketplace. Ponder this, and apply it to 
yourself. 



47. The flames of hell htirn uithnur light (ef. St. Basil, Ihtn, in lY H, { H |l'<; 2^. 
372AI). 



137 



JOHN CMMACUS 



Do not imitate those who in Jurying the dead first lament 
them — and then go oil to gel drunk. K.iiher, lie like those prisoners in 
the mines who are flogged every liour hy their warders. 

The man who mourns at one time ;>iid then goes in for high liv- 
ing and laughter on another occasion is like someone who pelts the 
dog of sensuality with bread. It looks as if he is driving him off when 
in fact he is actually encouraging him to stay by him. 

When you are recollected do not show off. Withdraw into your 
heart, and remember that devils fear recollection as thieves fear dogs. 

We have not been called here to a wedding feast. No indeed. He 
who has called us has summoned us to mourn for ourselves. 

Blind tears are suitable only to irrational beings, and yet there 
are some people who try, when they weep, to stifle all thought. Tears 
are actually the product of thought, and the father of thought is a ra- 
tional mind. 

Think of your lying in bed as an image of the lying in your 
grave; then you will not sleep so much. When you eat at table, re- 
member the food of worms; then you will not live so highly. When 
you drink water, remember the thirst of the flames; then you will cer- 
tainly do violence to your nature. 

When the father superior visits an honorable rebuke, reprimand, 
or punishment on us, let us not forget the fearful sentence of the 
Judge, so that with meekness and patience — a two-edged sword — we 
may kill the irrational sorrow and bitterness that will surely be sown 
in us. 

Job says: "The sea wastes with time" (Job 14:11). And with time 
and patience, the things I have been talking about are gradually ac- 
quired and made perfect within us. 

Let the thought of eternal fire lie down with you in the evening 
and get up with you in the morning. Then indolence will never over- 
whelm you when it is time to sing the psalms. 

Wear something to encourage you in your mourning. Those who 
lament the dead wear black. And if you find yourself unable to 
mourn, then lament that very fact; but if you are able to mourn, be 
sure to lament that by your sins you have brought yourself down 
from a condition free from toil to one that is full of labor. 

Regarding our tears, as in everything else about us, the good and 
just Judge will certainly make allowances for our natural attributes. I 
have seen small teardrops shed like drops of blood, and I have seen 
floods of tears poured out with no trouble at all. So I judge toilers by 



138 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



their struggles, rather than their tears; and I suspect that God does so 
too. 

Theology and mourning do not go together, for the one dissi- 
pates the other. The difference between a theologian and a mourner 
is that the one sits on a professorial chair while the other passes his 
days in rags on a dungheap. This, I think, is the reason behind the 
answer given by David. Although he was a teacher and a wise man, 
when he was asked why he was in mourning he said: "How shall I 
sing the Lord's song in a strange land?" (Ps. 136:4). He means, of 
course, the land of the passions. 

In the domain of creation as in that of compunction, there is that 
which moves itself and that which is moved by some other agent. 
When the soul grows tearful, weeps, and is filled with tenderness, 
and all this without having striven for it, then let us run, for the Lord 
has arrived uninvited and is holding out to us the sponge of loving 
sorrow, the cool waters of blessed sadness with which to wipe away 
the record of our sins. Guard these tears like the apple of your eye 
until they go away, for they have a power greater than anything that 
comes from our own efforts and our own meditation. 

A man misses the true beauty of mourning if he can mourn at 
will, rather than because he genuinely wants to, or, more accurately, 
because God wishes him to. The ugly tears of vainglory mingle fre- 
quently with mourning which is pleasing to God, as we shall discover 
by experience whenever we find ourselves mourning and yet doing 
wrong. 

True compunction is pain of soul without any distraction. It of- 
fers itself no rest and thinks hourly of death. It stands in wait for the 
God Who brings comfort, like cool waters, to humble monks. And 
those gifted with the heart's depth of mourning regard their lives as 
detestable, painful, and wearying, as a cause of tears and suffering, 
and they turn away from their body as from an enemy. 

If we observe anger and pride in those who have the appearance 
of mourning in a fashion pleasing to God, then such tears will seem 
contradictory to us. "For what fellowship is there between light and 
darkness?" (2 Cor. 6:14). True compunction brings consolation while 
that which is bogus produces self-esteem. Like the fire that consutnes 
the straw, so do real tears consume impurity of body and soul. 

Many ttf the Lathers declare that this problem of tears, cspfci.ilU 
where it concerns beginners, is a very obscure inatler niiil Imid u> 
analy/.c since tears can come about in various ways. I cHtfi coiih' Ikuii 



139 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



nature, from God, from suffering good and bad, from vainglory, from 
licentiousness, from love, from the remembrance of death, and from 
numerous other causes. Having trained ourselves in all these ways by 
the fear of God, let us acquire the pure and guileless tears that come 
with the remembrance that we must die. There is nothing false in 
these, no sop to self-esteem. Rather do they purify us, lead us on in 
love of God, wash away our sins and drain away our passions. 

It is not to be wondered at if mourning begins with good tears 
and ends with bad, but it is admirable if ordinary and natural tears 
can be turned round to become spiritual. This is something that will 
be understood by those inclined to vainglory. 

If your soul is still not perfectly pure, then be suspicious of your 
tears, for wine drawn straight from the presses cannot be trusted. 

No one will deny that all tears that are pleasing to God are prof- 
itable. But only at death will we find out where the profit lies. 

The man who mourns constantly in a way that pleases God does 
not cease to celebrate daily, but tears without end are in store for the 
man who does not abandon bodily celebrations. 

There is no joy or pleasure to be had in prison, and genuine 
monks do not feast on earth. There, perhaps, lies the reason for the 
sad statement: "Lead my soul out of prison so that henceforth it may 
rejoice in Your ineffable light" (Ps. 141:8). 

In your heart be like an emperor, seated high in humility, com- 
manding laughter: "Go!" and it goes; and sweet weeping: "Come!" 
and it comes; and our tyrant and slave, the body: "Do this!" and it 
does it. 

The man wearing blessed, God-given mourning like a wedding 
garment gets to know the spiritual laughter of the soul. 

Has any one ever lived so piously under a monastic regime that 
he never missed a day or hour or moment, but spent all his time for 
the Lord? And remember that never in your life can you see the same 
day twice. 

Blessed is the monk who can lift up the eyes of his soul to the 
powers of heaven. And truly safe from lapse is the man who remem- 
bers sin and death constantly and who moistens his cheeks with liv- 
ing tears from his bodily eyes. It seems to me that the second state 
must surely lead to the first. 

I have seen petitioners and shameless beggars melt even the 
hearts of kings by the artful words they use. But I have also watched 
another kind of beggar, those poor in virtue, men who have no knack 



140 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



with words, who talk in humble, vague, and halting fashion, who are 
not ashamed to implore the King of heaven persistently from the 
depths of a desperate heart and who by their tenacity lay siege to His 
inviolable nature and His compassion. 

The man who takes pride in his tears and who secretly condemns 
those who do not weep is rather like the man who asks the king for a 
weapon against the enemy — and then uses it to commit suicide. 

God does not demand or desire that someone should mourn out 
of sorrow of heart, but rather that out of love for Him he should re- 
joice with the laughter of the soul. Take away sin and then the sor- 
rowful tears that flow from bodily eyes will be superfluous. Why look 
for a bandage when you are not cut? Adam did not weep before the 
fall, and there will be no tears after the resurrection when sin will be 
abolished, when pain, sorrow, and lamentation will have taken flight. 

I have seen mourning in some; in others I have watched mourn- 
ing for the inability to mourn, for though they have it they act as if 
they did not, and through such splendid ignorance they remain invio- 
late. Regarding such, it was said: "The Lord makes wise the blind" 
(Ps. 145:8). 

Silly men often take pride in their tears — hence the reason some 
are not granted the gift of mourning. And men of this kind, discover- 
ing that they cannot weep, think of themselves as wretched and give 
themselves over to sighs and lamentation, sorrow of soul, deep grief, 
and utter desolation, all of which can safely take the place of tears, 
though the men in question regard these as nothing and benefit ac- 
cordingly. 

Devils play cruel tricks on us, as we will discover if we are obser- 
vant. When we have a full stomach they make us feel guilty. When we 
fast they harden our hearts with the result that we can deceive our- 
selves with spurious tears and then give ourselves over to high living, 
which is the mother of passions. So do not listen to them, and act in a 
way opposite to what they suggest. 

As I ponder the true nature of compunction, I find myself 
amazed by the way in which inward joy and gladness mingle with 
what we call mourning and grief, like honey in a comb. There must 
be a lesson here, and it surely is that compunction is properly a gift 
from God, so that there is a real pleasure in the soul, since (iod sccrci- 
ly brings consolation to those who in their heart of hearts arc repen- 
tant. 

Listen to a story that is a sad one but beneficial to the soul, Li,*il(-M 



141 



JOHN CMMACUS 



to it, for it is an inducement to most valuable mourning and sorrow. 

A man called Stephen once lived here as a solitary. He spent 
many years in the wrestling-school of monastic life. Tears and fasting 
adorned his soul, as did many other fine achievements. His cell was 
on the side of the sacred mountain where the holy prophet and seer of 
God Elijah had once lived. He became famous and later he decided to 
practice a vastly more effective, ascetic and strict life of penance, and 
so moved on to Siddim, an abode of hermit.s. He spent several years 
there and lived very strictly. It was a place lacking every comfort and 
was rarely visited, since it was about seventy miles from the fort. 
Near the end of his life, the old man returned to the holy mountain, 
to his ceil of which two holy disciples from Palestine had taken care. 
After a few days he was stricken by the illness from which he would 
eventually die. On the day before his death, he went into ecstasy and 
began to look to the right and to the left of his bed. He seemed to be 
rendering an account to someone, and in the hearing of the bystand- 
ers he said: "Of course it is true. That was why I fasted for so many 
years." Or again: "Yes, that is correct, but I wept and served my 
brothers." Or again: "No. You are accusing me falsely." Or some- 
times: "Quite right. No, I have no excuse. But God is merciful." This 
unseen and relentless interrogation was a truly awful and frightening 
spectacle. Worst of all was the fact that he was charged with offenses 
of which he was innocent, and, what is extraordinary, regarding some 
of them this hesychast and hermit would say; "I do not know how to 
answer." And yet he had been a monk for almost forty years and he 
had the gift of tears as well. Alas, alas! Where, then, was the voice of 
Ezekiel, to say to the tormentor: "I will judge you as I find you, says 
God" (Exek. 33:13-20)? He was truly unable to say such a thing. And 
why was that? Glory to Him who alone knows, and this was a man 
who had reared a leopard by hand in the desert,*^ or so I was solemn- 
ly told. So ther^ he was now, called to account, and he died while it 
was happening! leaving us unsure of the judgment passed on him, of 
his final end or'; sentence or of the verdict rendered him. 

Like the widow who has lost her husband and whose only son is 
the single comfort remaining to her after the Lord, the only comfort 



48. Or: "fed a leopard from his hand." An Adamic clo.senes.s to animaLs was a char- 
ism of the Desert Fathers. 



142 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



for a lapsed soul at the moment of death is the toil of fasting and of 
tears. 

Such people never sing, never raise a loud song, for mourning 
would thus be lost. And if you think you can summon it in this fash- 
ion, you have a long way to go. Mourning, after all, is the typical pain 
of a soul on fire. 

For many people, mourning prepared the way for blessed dispas- 
sion. It worked over, ploughed, and got rid of what was sinful. Some- 
one well practiced in this said to me: "Very often when I was 
tempted to be vain, angry, or gluttonous, the thought of mourning 
within me would protest: 'Do not be vain or else I shall abandon you.' 
The same thing happened when other passions troubled me. I would 
declare: 'I shall never disobey you until you present me to Christ.' " 

The depths of mourning have witnessed comfort, and enlighten- 
ment has followed on purity of heart. Enlightenment is something in- 
describable, an activity that is unknowingly perceived and invisibly 
seen. Comfort is the balm of a distressed soul, which at the same time 
both cries and shouts happily, just like a child. Divine help is the re- 
newal of a soul bowed by grief in such a way that painful tears are 
marvelously transformed into painless ones. 

Tears over our death produce fear, but when fear begets fearless- 
ness, then what a joy comes dawning! When joy is without interrup- 
tion, holy love comes blossoming forth. 

Drive off with lowly hand every passing joy as something of 
which you are unworthy, for if you let it in, you may be admitting a 
wolf instead of a shepherd. 

Do not hurry to contemplation at the wrong time. Rather, let it 
come to you, seeking out the beauty of your lowliness, ready to join 
you for all time in a spotless marriage. 

When a baby starts to recognize its father, it is filled with happi- 
ness. If the father has to spend time away on business before return- 
ing home, it has its fill of joy and sadness — joy at seeing the one it 
loves, sadness at the fact of having been deprived so long of that same 
love. Sometimes a mother hides from her baby and is delighted to 
note how sadly the child goes about looking for her, because this is 
how she teaches the child to be always attached to her and stirs up the 
flame of its love for her. He who has ears to hear, let him listen, as the 
Lord has .said (cf. Luke 14:3.';). 

A man who has heard himself sentenced to death will nu( worry 



\4i 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



about the way theaters are run. Similarly, a man who is truly in 
mourning will never go back to high living, glory, anger, or irritabil- 
ity. Mourning is the kind of sorrow which belongs to the penitent 
soul whose pains multiply hke those of a woman in childbirth. 

The Lord is just and is holy (Ps. 144:17). He leads the inwardly 
silent man to inward compunction, and every day He brings joy to 
the one who is inwardly obedient. But he who does not practice com- 
punction or submission with sincerity is deprived of mourning. 

Drive far away that hound of hell which comes at the time of 
your deepest mourning and whispers that God is neither merciful 
nor compassionate. You will find, if you take the trouble, that before 
you sinned he was assuring you that God is loving, compassionate, 
and forgiving. 

Meditation gives birth to perseverance, and perseverance ends in 
perception, and what is accomplished with perception cannot easily 
be rooted out. On the other hand, however exalted our style of life 
may be, we may label it state and bogus if our heart is still without 
contrition; for, if I may so express the matter, it is absolutely essential 
that those who have lapsed after baptism should clean the pitch from 
their hands with continuous fire of the heart and with the oil of God. 

I have seen men who reached the ultimate in mourning, with the 
blood of a suffering and wounded heart actually flowing out of their 
mouths, and I was reminded of the saying: "Like grass I am cut down 
and my heart is dried up" (Ps. 10] ;5). 

Tears caused by fear give some protection, but tears produced by 
a love that, as may well happen, has not yet attained perfection can be 
easily stolen. Of course, the reminder of eternal fire can stir the heart 
at certain efficacious times, and this humbler way is, surprisingly, 
very often the safer way. 

There are material substances that can dry up the sources of 
our tears, and there are others that can produce mud and reptiles. 
From the former came the unlawful intercourse of Lot with his 
daughters (cf. Gen. 19:30-38). From the latter came the devil's fall 
from heaven.*'' 

The forces against us are so abominable that they can even turn 
the mothers of virtue into the parents of vice, and they can turn into 
pride those very things that should produce humility in us. 



49. The material substances are rhose which cause drunkenne.ss on the one hiiiui 
and pride on the other. 



144 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



It often happens that the very sight of our solitary dwellings can 
stir our minds to compunction. Joshua, Elijah, and John are proof of 
this, and yet they were accustomed to solitary prayer. I have seen 
men moved to tears in cities and among crowds so that the thought 
has come that great assemblies of people may actually do us no harm. 
Yet they may draw us back too close to the world, since the evil spir- 
its are working hard to bring this about. 

A single word has often dispelled mourning. But it would be 
strange indeed if a single word brought it back. 

When we die, we will not be criticized for having failed to work 
miracles. We will not be accused of having failed to be theologians or 
contemplatives. But we will certainly have some explanation to offer 
to God for not having mourned unceasingly. 

Such, then, is the seventh step. May he who has been found wor- 
thy of it help me too. He himself has already been helped, for by tak- 
ing this seventh step he has washed away th« stains of the world. 



145 



Step 8 



ON PLACIDITY AND MEEKNESS 



As the gradual pouring of water on a fire puts out the flame com- 
pletely, so the tears of genuine mourning can extinguish every flame 
of anger and irascibility. Hence this comes next in our sequence. 

Freedom from anger is an endless wish for dishonor, whereas 
among the vainglorious there is a limitless thirst for praise. Freedom 
from anger is a triumph over one's nature. It is the ability to be im- 
pervious to insults, and comes by hard work and the sweat of one's 
brow. 

Meekness is a permanent condition of that soul which remains 
unaffected by whether or not it is spoken well of, whether or not it is 
honored or praised. 

The first step toward freedom from anger is to keep the lips si- 
lent when the heart is stirred; the next, to keep thoughts silent when 
the soul is upset; the last, to be totally calm when unclean winds are 
blowing. 

Anger is an indication of concealed hatred, of grievance nursed. 
Anger is the wish to harm someone who has provoked you. 

Irascibility is an untimely flaring up of the heart- Bitterness is a 
stirring of the soul's capacity for displeasure. Anger is an easily 
changed movement of one's disposition, a disfigurement of the soul. 

Just as darkness retreats before light, so all anger and bitterness 
disappears before the fragrance of humility. 

Some unfortunate people, who have a tendency to anger, neglect 



146 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



the treatment and cure of this passion and so give no thought to the 
saying, "The moment of his anger is his downfall" (Ecclus. 1:22). 

A quick movement of a millstone can grind in one moment and 
do away with more of the soul's grain and fruit than another crushes 
in a whole day. So we must be understanding and we must pay atten- 
tion, for a strong sudden wind may fan a blaze that will cause more 
damage to the field of the heart than a lingering flame could ever 
manage to achieve. Let us not forget, my friends, that evil demons 
sometimes leave us unexpectedly, with the result that we may become 
careless about these strong passions within us, thinking them to be of 
no consequence, and become, therefore, incurably ill. 

Take a hard stone with sharp corners. Knock it and rub it against 
other stones, until its sharpness and hardness are crushed by the 
knocking and rubbing and, at last, it is made round. So too, take a soul 
that is rough and abrupt. Put it into the community and company of 
tough, short-tempered men. One of two things must happen: Either it 
learns through patience to cure its wound, or it will run away and, by 
so doing, it will learn its weakness, its cowardly flight showing it up 
as if in a mirror. 

An angry person is like a voluntary epileptic who, through an in- 
voluntary tendency, breaks out in convulsions and falls down. 

Nothing is quite so out of place in a penitent as an unruly spirit, 
for conversion requires great humility, and anger is an indication of 
all kinds of presumptuousness, 

A sign of utter meekness is to have a heart peacefully and loving- 
ly disposed toward someone who has been offensive, and a sure proof 
of a hot temper is that a man, even when he is alone, should with 
word and gesture continue to rage and fulminate against some absent 
person who has given offense. 

If it is true that the Holy Spirit is peace of soul, as He is said to be 
and as, indeed. He is, and if anger is disturbance of the heart, as it 
really is and as it is said to be, then there is no greater obstacle to the 
presence of the Spirit in us than anger. 

We know that the fruits of anger are abundant and unacceptable, 
yet we recogni/.e that one of its involuntary offspring, though unlaw- 
ful, is nevertheless quite useful. 1 have seen people delivered from 
passion by the very fact that they had flared up and then fxuircd oiii 
their long-stf>red grievance and, in addition, thev got from their of- 
Icnder cither some reparation or some e.xplanalion lor wlml hrtd 
caused the long-standing grievance. On the other hiind, I have Pipcfl 



147 



JOHN CUMACUS 



men who appeared to be displaying stolid patience, but who, in reali- 
ty, were silently harboring resentment within themselves. These, it 
seems to me, were much more to be pitied than the men prone to ex- 
plosions of temper, because what they were doing was to keep away 
the holy white dove with that black gall of theirs. So this is a serpent 
that has to be handled carefully, for, like the snake of sensuality, it has 
nature for an ally. 

I have seen angry men push food away out of sheer bitterness. 
And yet by this kind of unreasonable abstinence they merely added 
poison to poison. 1 have seen others who on being offended for some 
apparently justifiable reason gave themselves over to stuffing them- 
selves, so that from the pit of anger they fell headlong over the preci- 
pice of gluttony. But others, again, I have seen who were intelligent 
about this matter and, like good doctors, they mixed both, and from 
moderate consolation they got very great profit. 

Singing, in moderation, can occasionally ease bad temper. But if 
it is untimely and immoderate, it may open the path to pleasure. We 
should therefore set specific times for singing and make good use 
of it. 

Once, while engaged on some task, 1 happened to be sitting out- 
side a monastery and near the cells of those living in solitude. I could 
overhear them raging alone in their cells and in their bitter fury leap- 
ing about like caged partridges, leaping at the face of their offender as 
if he were actually there. My humble advice to them was to abandon 
solitary living in case they be turned from human beings into devils. 

I have also noticed that people who are sensual and corrupt at 
heart are often meek. They manifest a kind of flattery, a display of 
familiarity, a love of beSutiful faces. To these I gave the advice that 
they should undertake the solitary life, using it like a scalpel to cut 
away sensuality and corruption of the heart. Otherwise they might 
turn from being rational beings into pitifully irrational animals. 

■ But, again, some told me that they were completely in the grip of 
anger and sensuality. I therefore forbade them to live as they wished 
and, in my concern for them, I suggested to their superiors that they 
should allow them sometimes to live one way, sometimes the other, 
but always in complete subjection to those in charge of them. There 
is the risk that a sensual person may harm himself and perhaps a close 
friend as well; while the angry person, like a wolf, often disturbs the 
entire flock and causes offense and discouragement among many 
souls. 



148 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



The eye of the heart should not be troubled by anger. Remember 
the saying: "My eye is troubled from anger" (Ps. 6:8). Worse, howev- 
er, is to give way to harsh words which reveal the upheaval in one's 
soul. But actually to start fighting is completely inimical to and at 
variance with the monastic, angelic, and divine life. 

You wish, or rather, have decided, to remove a splinter from 
someone? Very well, but do not go after it with a stick instead of a 
lancet for you will only drive it deeper. Rough speech and harsh ges- 
tures are the stick, while even-tempered instruction and patient repri- 
mand are the lancet. "Reprove, rebuke, exhort," says the Apostle (2 
Tim. 4:2), not "batter." And should a beating be necessary, make sure 
this does not happen often and get someone else to do it instead of 
you. 

You will note that many irritable persons practice vigils, fasting, 
and stillness. For the devils are trying to suggest to them, under cover 
of penance and mourning, what is quite likely to increase their pas- 
sion. 

If what I said above is true, namely, that a single wolf, helped by 
a demon, can trouble an entire flock, then surely a single very wise 
brother, helped by an angel, may calm the waves and make a smooth 
path for the ship by pouring a good skin full of oil on the waters. And 
as the sentence on the one will be heavy, so the reward for the other 
from God Will be very great, and he will become an edifying example 
to everyone. 

The first stage of blessed patience is to accept dishonor with bit- 
terness and anguish of soul. The intermediate stage is to be free from 
pain amid all such things. The perfect stage, if that is attainable, is to 
think of dishonor as praise. Let the first rejoice and the second be 
strong, but blessed be the third, for he exults in the Lord. 

Angry people, because of their self-esteem, make a pitiable sight, 
though they do not realize this themselves. They get angry and then, 
when thwarted, they become furious. It was amazing to see one fall 
punished by another and I was full of pity for them as I saw them 
taking revenge on sin by sin. The trickery of devils frightened me and 
I came close to despair for my own life. 

Someone who notices that he is easily overcome by pride, a nasty 
temper, malice, and hypocrisy, and who thinks of defending himscit 
against these by unsheathing the d<3uble-edged sword of mecknes*i 
and piuierice, sucli a man if he wishes to break free cniiri'ly limn 
these vices ought to go live in a monastery, as if it were u (uilrr's nIii)|> 



149 



JOHN CIJMACUS 



of salvation. In particular, he should choose the most austere place. 
He will be spiritually stretched and beaten by the insults, injuries, 
and rebuffs of the brothers. He may even be physically beaten, tram- 
pled on, and kicked, so that he may wash out the filth still lying in the 
sentient part of his soul. There is an old saying that reproof is the 
washtub for the soul's passions, and you ought to believe it, for people 
in the world who load indignities onto someone and then boast about 
it to others like to say, "I gave him a good scrubbing." Which, of 
course, is quite accurate. 

The absence of a tendency to anger when it is found in novices 
and is the result of mourning — this is one thing; the peace found in 
the perfect is something else. In the one, tears, acting like a bridle, 
hold in the anger; but, among the perfect, anger has been mortified 
by mastery of the passions, like a snake killed by a sword. 

I once saw three monks receive the same type of injury at the 
same time. The first felt it keenly, but did not speak; the second was 
delighted by the thought of the reward the injury would bring him 
and he felt compassion for the wrongdoer; the third wept fervently at 
the thought of the harm his offending neighbor was suffering. At 
work, then, were fear, the sense of a reward due, and love. 

The fever suffered by the body is a single symptom but has many 
causes. Similarly, the seething movement of our anger and of our oth- 
er passions arises for many different reasons, so that the same cure 
cannot be offered for all of them. Hence I would propose that each 
sick man should very carefully look for his own particular cure, and 
the first step here is the diagnosis of the cause of the disease. When 
this is known, the patients will get the right cure from the hands of 
God and from their spiritual doctors. Those who. wish to join us in 
the Lord should therefore come to the spiritual tribunal where we 
can be tested in various ways and find out about the passions referred 
to above as well as their causes. 

So, then, anger the oppressor must be restrained by the chains of 
meekness, beaten by patience, hauled away by blessed love. Take it 
before the tribunal of reason and have it examined in the following 
terms; "Wretch, tell us the name of your father, the name of the 
mother who bore you to bring calamity into the world, the names of 
your loathsome sons and daughters. Tell us, also, who your enemies 
are and who has the power to kill you." And this is how anger replies: 
"1 come from many sources and I have more than one father. My 
mothers are \'ainglory. Avarice, Greed. And Lust too. My father is 



to 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



named Conceit. My daughters have the names Remembrance of 
Wrongs, Hate, Hostility, and Self-justification. The enemies who 
have imprisoned me are the opposite virtues — Freedom from Anger 
and Lowliness, while Humility lays a trap for me. As for Humility, 
ask in due time who it was that bore her." 

On the eighth step the crown is freedom from anger. He who 
wears it by nature may never come to wear another. But he who has 
sweated for it and won it has conquered all eight together. 



151 



Step 9 



ON MALICE^^^ 



The holy virtues are like the ladder of Jacob and the unholy vices 
are like the chains that fell off the chief apostle Peter. The virtues lead 
from one to another and carry heavenward the man who chooses 
them. \'ices on the other hand beget and stifle one another. And be- 
cause we have just heard senseless anger describe remembrance of 
wrongs as its offspring, we had better say something about it now. 

Remembrance of wrongs comes as the final point of anger. It is a 
keeper of sins. It hates a just way of life. It is the ruin of virtues, the 
poison of the soul, a worm in the mind. It is the shame of prayer, a 
cutting off of supplication, a turning away from love, a nail piercing 
the soul. It is a pleasureless-^° feeling cherished in the sweetness of bit- 
terness. It is a never-ending sin, an unsleeping wrong, rancor by the 
hour. A dark and loathsome passion, it comes to be but has no off- 
spring, so that one need not say too much about it. 

The man who has put a stop to anger has also wiped out remem- 
brance of wrongs, since offspring can come only from a living parent. 

A loving man banishes revenge, but a man brooding on his ha- 
treds stores up troublesome labors for himself. A banquet of love does 



49a. !n this Step mnisiiakm is rendered sometimes as "malice" and sometimes as 
the more specific "remembrance of wrongs." 

SO. Reading <i«i(/oBOj for Raier's iinoiiytios, "painless." 



152 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



away with hatred and honest giving brings peace to a souk^^" but if 
the table is extravagant then license is brought forth and gluttony 
comes jumping in through the window of love. 

I have seen hatred shatter a lecherous relationship, and then 
afterwards remembrance of wrongs stood in the way of restoring the 
relationship. Now this is amazing, one devil cured by another. Still, 
this may be the work of divine providence rather than of demons. 

Remembrance of wrongs is far removed from sturdy, natural 
love, but like a flea hidden on a dove, may live next door to fornica- 
tion. 

Let your malice and your spite be turned against the devils. 
Treat your body always as an enemy, for the flesh is an ungrateful 
and treacherous friend. The more you look after it, the more it hurts 
you. 

Malice is an exponent of Scripture which twists the words of the 
Spirit to suit itself. Let the prayer of Jesus*' put it to shame, that 
prayer which cannot be uttered in the company of malice. 

If after great effort you still fail to root out this thorn, ^^ go to 
your enemy and apologize, if only with empty words whose insincer- 
ity may shame you. Then as conscience, like a fire, comes to give you 
pain, you may find that a sincere love of your enemy may come to 
life. 

A true sign of having completely mastered this putrefaction will 
come not when you pray for the man who offended you, not when 
you give him presents, not when you invite him to share a meal with 
you, but only when, on hearing of some catastrophe that has afflicted 
him in body or soul, you suffer and you lament for him as if for your- 
self. 

A malicious hesychast is like a lurking snake carrying about its 
own deadly poison. 



50a. 1 he words "A banquet of love does away with hatred and honest giving 
brings peace to a soul" are not in Rader's text. 

.?!. The words "prayer of Jesus" {lisoti t pnsevchi) are sometimes understood as re- 
ferring here to the Jesus Prayer, "Lord Jesus Chri.st, Son of God, have mercy on me," 
Kut more prol)alily (^limacus means the Lord's Prayer. The petition, "I'orgivc ns mtr 
irespasses as we fnryive those «ho trespass against ns," is particularlv upfjiisiie in ihc 
present eonlext. See ilit Preface, p]>. 45-i i. 

52. Or: "de.slriiy tins siuiiililing-hlock completely," 



!<;! 



JOIINCI.IMACUS 



I he remembnituc ol what Jesus suffered is a cure for remem- 
brance of wrongs, sli;iming ii powerfully with His patient endurance. 

Worms thrive in ;. rotn-ti tree; malice thrives in the deceptively 
meek and silent. He who has evpc-licd malice has found forgiveness, 
but he who hugs it is deprived ot mercy. 

Some labor and struggle hard lo earn forgiveness, but better than 
these IS the man who forgets the wrongs done to him. Forgive quickly 
and you will be abundantly forgiven. To forget wrongs is to prove 
oneself truly repentant, but to brood on them and at the same time to 
imagme one is practicing repentance is to act like the man who is con- 
vmced he is running when in fact he is fast asleep. 

I have seen malicious people recommending forgiveness to others 
and then, shamed by their own words, they managed to rid them- 
selves of this vice. 

Never imagine that this dark vice is a pa.ssion of no importance, 
for It often reaches out even to spiritual men. 

Such is the ninth step. Let him who has taken it have the courage 
henceforth to ask Jesus the Savior to free him from his sins. 



Step 10 



ON SLANDER 



I imagine that no one with any sense would dispute that slander 
IS the child of hatred and remembrance of wrongs. Hence the need to 
discuss It next in the order after its forbears. 

Slander is the offspring of hatred, a subtle and yet crass disease, a 
eech in hiding and escaping notice, wasting and draining away the 
hfeblood of love. It puts on the appearance of love and is the ambassa- 
dor of an unholy and unclean heart. And it is the ruin of chastity 

I here are girls who flaunt their shamelessness, but there are oth- 
ers who are much worse, for they put on the appearance of great 
modesty while secretly engaging m abominable behavior. So it is 
with shameful vices. And indeed there are numerous insincere maid- 
ens: hypocrisy, cunning, melancholy, brooding over past injuries se- 
cret contempt for others. They put on a show of doing one thing- 
and then act otherwise. 

I have rebuked people who were engaged in slander, and, in self- 
deferise, these evildoers claimed to be acting out of love and concern 
for the victim of their slander. My answer to that was to say "Then 
stop that kind of love, or else you will be making a liar out of him 
who declared, 'I drove away the man who secretly slandered his 
neighbor (Ps. 100:5). If, as you insist, you love that man, then do not 
beniakmga mockery of him, but pray for him in .secret, for this is the 
kind of love that is acceptable to the Lord. And remember-now 1 say 
this as .something to be pondered, and do not start passing judgnirnt 



\54 



\i^ 



JOHN c;limacus 



on the offender — Judas w;i.s nnc nt ihe company of Christ's disciples 
and the robljcr was in ilie lompuny of killers. Yet what a turnabout 
there was when the decisive mornent arrived!" 

If you want to overcome the spirit of slander, blame not the per- 
son who falls but the prompting demon. No one wants to sin against 
God, even though all of us sin without being compelled to it. 

I knew a man who sinned openly but repented in secret. I de- 
nounced him for being lecherous but he was chaste in the eyes of 
God, having propitiated Him by a genuine conversion. 

Do not allow human respect to get in your way when you hear 
someone slandering his neighbor. Instead, say this to him; "Brother, 
stop it! I do worse things every day, so how can I criticize him?" You 
accomplish two things when you say this. You heal yourself and you 
heal your neighbor with the one bandage. 

Do not make judgments, and you will travel no quicker road to 
the forgiveness of your sins. "Judge not, so that you may not be 
judged" (Luke 6:37). 

Fire and water do not mix, neither can you mix judgment of oth- 
ers with the desire to repent. If a man commits a sin before you at the 
very moment of his death, pass no judgment, because the judgment of 
God is hidden from men. It has happened that men have sinned great- 
ly in the open but have done greater good deeds in secret, so that 
those who would disparage them have been fooled, with smoke in- 
stead of sunlight in their eyes. So listen to me, all you accountants of 
other people's faults, listen well; for if, as is certain, it is true that 
"you shall be judged with the judgment you have used yourselves" 
(Matt. 7:2), then whatever sin of body or spirit that we ascribe to our 
neighbor we will surely fall into ourselves. 

Those who pass speedy and harsh judgments on the sins of their 
neighbors fall into this passion because they themselves have so far 
failed to achieve a complete and unceasing memory of and concern 
for their own sins. Anyone untrammeled by self-love and able to see 
his own faults for what they are would worry about no one else in 
this life. He would feel that his time on earth did not suffice for his 
own mourning, even if he lived a hundred years, and even if a whole 
Jordan of tears poured out of his eyes. Mourning of that kind has, as I 
know, no trace in it of slander or harsh judgment. 

It is the murdering demons who push us into sin. If they are 
balked here, they get us to pass judgment on those who are sinning, 
thereby smearing us with the stain we are denouncing in others. 



156 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



You can always recognize people who are malicious and slander- 
ous. They are filled with the spirit of hatred. Gladly and without a 
qualm they slander the teaching, the doings and the virtues of their 
neighbor. I have known men who secretly had committed very grave 
sins and had not been found out, yet cloaked in their supposed good- 
ness they lashed out against people who had done something minor in 
public. 

To pass judgment on another is to usurp shamelessly a preroga- 
tive of God, and to condemn is to ruin one's soul. 

Self-esteem, even when there are no other attendant vices, can 
bring a man down. Similarly, if we have got into the habit of passing 
judgments, we can be destroyed completely by this alone, for the 
Pharisee was condemned for this very thing. 

A good grape picker chooses to eat ripe grapes and does not 
pluck what is unripe. A charitable and sensible mind takes careful 
note of the virtues it observes in another, while the fool goes looking 
for faults and defects. It is of such a one that it was said, "They have 
searched out iniquity and died in the search'' (Ps. 6?:7). 

Do not condemn. Not even if your very eyes are seeing some- 
thing, for they may be deceived. 

This is the tenth step, and he who succeeds in it has practiced 
love or mourning. 



1.^7 



Step 11 



ON TALKATIVENESS 
AND SILENCE 



The brief discussion in the previous chapter was concerned with 
the great danger of passing judgment on others, or rather with being 
judged and being punished by one's tongue, and it touched on the fact 
that this vice can lay hold of the most apparently spiritual people. 

The time has come now to indicate the cause of this vice and to 
give an adequate account of the door by which it enters — or, more ac- 
curately, by which it goes out. 

Talkativeness is the throne of vainglory on which it loves to 
preen itself and show off. Talkativeness is a sign of ignorance, a door- 
way to slander, a leader of jesting, a servant of lies, the ruin of com- 
punction, a summoner of despondency, a messenger of sleep, a 
dissipation of recollection, the end of vigilance, the cooling of zeal, 
the darkening of prayer. 

Intelligent silence is the mother of prayer, freedom from bond- 
age, custodian of zeal, a guard on our thoughts, a watch on our ene- 
mies, a prison of mourning, a friend of tears, a sure recollection of 
death, a painter of punishment, a concern with judgment, servant of 
anguish, foe of license, a companion of stillness, the opponent of dog- 
matism, a growth of knowledge, a hand to shape contemplation, hid- 
den progress, the secret journey upward. For the man who recognizes 



158 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



his sins has taken control of his tongue, while the chatterer has yet to 
discover himself as he should. 

The lover of silence draws close to God. He talks to Him in se- 
cret and God enlightens him. Jesus, by His silence, shamed Pilate; 
and a man, by his stillness, conquers vainglory. Peter wept bitterly 
for what he had said. He had forgotten the one who declared: "I said: 
I will guard my ways so that I may not sin with my tongue" (Ps. 38:1). 
He had forgotten too the saying, "Better to fall from a height to the 
ground than to slip with the tongue" (Ecclus. 20:18). 

I would prefer not to write too much about this, despite the urg- 
ings of my wily passions. Someone who had asked me once about 
stillness told me that talkativeness invariably results from one of the 
following causes; from a bad or relaxed life-style ("the tongue," he 
said, "is a member of the body, like the rest, and therefore needs to be 
trained in its habits"); or it comes from vainglory, a particular prob- 
lem with ascetics; or it comes at times from gluttony, which is why 
many who keep a hard check on the stomach can more easily restrain 
the blathering tongue. < 

The man who is seriously concerned about death reduces the 
amount of what he has to say, and the man who has received the gift 
of spiritual mourning runs from talkativeness as from a fire. 

The lover of stillness keeps his mouth shut, but the man who 
likes to ramble outside is driven from his cell by this passion. 

The man who has known the odor of heavenly fire runs from a 
gathering of men, like a bee from smoke, since smoke drives off a bee 
just as company militates against a man. 

It is hard to keep water in without a dike. But it is harder still to 
hold in one's tongue. 

This is the eleventh step. He who succeeds in taking it has with 
one blow cut off a host of evils. 



I s<; 



Step 12 



ON FALSEHOOD 



From flint and steel comes fire; from chatter and joking comes 
lying. Lying is the destruction of charity, and perjury the very denial 
of God. 

No sensible man imagines that lying is a minor failing. Indeed 
the All-Holy Spirit pronounced the most dreadful sentence on this 
sin above all others; and if, as David says to God, "You will destroy 
everyone speaking a lie" (Ps. 5:7), what will happen to those who 
swear to their lies on oath? 

I have seen men, proud of their ability to lie, and exciting laugh- 
ter by their clowning and joking, who have miserably destroyed in 
their hearers the habit of mourning. But when the demons observe 
that we stay clear of the sallies of some outstanding wit, as though we 
were avoiding the plague, they try to catch us with two seemingly 
plausible thoughts, namely that we should not be offensive to the per- 
son telling the witty story and we should not give the appearance of 
loving God more than he does. Be off! Do not dawdle! Otherwise the 
jokes will start coming back to you when you are at prayer. But do 
not simply run away. Break up the bad company in a devout way by 
setting before them the thought of death and judgment, and if a few 
drops of vainglory fall on you, what harm? Provided of course, that 
you become a source of profit to many. 

Hypocrisy is the mother of lying and frequently its cause. Some 



160 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



would argue that hypocrisy is nothing other than a meditation on 
falsehood, that it is the inventor of falsehood laced with lies. 

The man gifted with fear of the Lord has given up lying, for 
within him he has conscience, that incorruptible judge. 

Various kinds of harm can be observed in the passions, and lying 
is no exception. So one judgment awaits the man who lies out of fear, 
another the liar who has nothing at all to worry about. One man lies 
for the sheer pleasure of it, another for amusement, another to raise a 
laugh among bystanders, another to trap his brother and do him 
harm. 

Magistrates can root out lying with tortures, though it is an 
abundance of tears that truly destroys it. A man may lie on the 
grounds of prudence, and indeed regards as an act of righteousness 
the actual destruction of his own soul. The inventor of lies declares 
that he is following the example of Rahab and maintains that his own 
destruction is the cause of salvation for others. ^^ 

Only when we are completely free of the urge to lie may we re- 
sort to it, and then only in fear and out of necessity. A baby does not 
know how to lie, and neither does a soul cleansed of evil. 

A man drunk on wine unwittingly tells the truth about every- 
thing. And a man drunk with compunction cannot lie. 

This is the twelfth step. The man who has taken it has obtained 
the root of all blessings. 



5.!, Kiihiili lied ti) .vavc the lives (if her family, (.'.t Joshun 2: lit. 



161 



Step 13 



ON DESPONDENCY 



Despondency or tedium of the spiriti^* as I have often said, is fre- 
quently an aspect of talkativeness and indeed is its first child. For this 
reason I have given it an appropriate place in the chain of vices. 

Tedium is a paralysis of the soul, a slackness of the mind, a ne- 
glect of religious exercises, a hostility to vows taken. It is an approval 
of worldly things. It is a voice claiming that God has no mercy and no 
love for men. It is a laziness in the singing of psalms, a weakness in 
prayer, a stubborn urge for service, a dedication to the work of the 
hands, an indifference to the requirement of obedience.^* An obedi- 
ent person does not know such tedium, for he has used the things of 
the senses to reach the level of the spirit. 

Tedium is rebuffed by community life, but she is a constant com- 
panion of the hermit, living with him until the day of his death, 
struggling with him until the very end. She smiles at the sight of a 
hermit's cell and comes creeping up to live nearby. 

A doctor calls on the sick in the morning, but tedium visits the 
hermit at noon.^* 



54. Akidia (see note 10, p. 80). 

55. Translating Rader's emendation, en hypakoi adokimos, although al! MSS read en 
hypakoi dokimos, with the opposite sense. 

56. The Fathers commonly attribute despondency to the noonday demon of Ps. 
90:6. 



162 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



Tedium loves to be involved in hospitality, urges the hermit to 
undertake manual labor so as to enable him to give alms, and exhorts 
us to visit the sick, recalling even the words of Him Who said, "I was 
sick and you came to visit me" (Matt. 25:36). Tedium suggests we 
should call on the despairing and the fainthearted, and she sets one 
languishing heart to bring comfort to another. Tedium reminds those 
at prayer of some job to be done, and in her brutish way she searches 
out any plausible excuse to drag us from prayer, as though with some 
kind of halter. 

At the third hour, the devil of tedium causes shivering, headache, 
and vertigo. By the ninth hour, the patient has recovered his strength, 
and when dinner is ready, he jumps out of bed. But now when the 
time for prayer comes, his body begins to languish once more. He be- 
gins his prayers, but the tedium makes him sleepy and the verses of 
the psalms are snatched from his mouth by untimely yawns. 

There is a particular virtue available to overcome all the other 
passions. But tedium is a kind of total death for the monk. 

A brave soul can stir up his dying mind, but tedium and laziness 
scatter every one of his treasures. 

Tedium is one of the eight deadly vices, and indeed the gravest of 
them all, and so I must discuss it as I did the others. Still, just note 
this much. When the psalms do not have to be sung, tedium does not 
arise, and the Office is hardly over when the eyes are ready to open 
again. 

The real men of spirit can be seen at the time when tedium 
strikes, for nothing gains so many crowns for a monk as the struggle 
against this. Note how tedium hits you when you are standing, and if 
you sit down, it suggests that it would be a good thing to lean back. It 
sugge-sts that you prop yourself up against the walls of your cell. It 
produces noise and footsteps— and there you go peeping out of the 
window. 

The man who mourns for himself does not suffer from tedium. 
This tyrant should be overcome by the remembrance of past sins, bat- 
tered by hard manual labor and brought to book by the thought of the 
blessings to come. And when led before the tribunal, let the.se be the 
questions put to him: "You there! You crass and sluggish creature, 
what was it that evilly begot the likes of you? Who are your children? 
Who are your enemies' Who can destroy you?" And tedium nuiv i»c 
constraiiied to reply: "I cannot lay my head among those who are Ini- 
ly obedicnl, and I live tjuietly where 1 may. I have niiiny ipioiIiit.* - 



k.f 



JOHN CMMACUS 



Stolidity of Soul, Forgetlulncss ul the Things of Heaven, or, some- 
times, loo Heavy a Hiirtk-ii of IrnnUks. My children who live with 
me are Changing from Place to IMacc, Disobedience to One's Superi- 
or, Forgetfulness of the Judgmeiil to (x)mc, and sometimes, the Aban- 
donment of One's Vocation. I'hc singing of (xsalms and manual labor 
are my opponents by whom I am now bound. My enemy is the 
thought of death, but what really slays me is prayer backed by a firm 
hope in the blessings of the future. And as to who gave birth to 
Prayer, you must ask her." 

This is the thirteenth victory. He who has won it is really out- 
standing in all virtue. 



164 



Step 14 



ON GLUTTONY 



In our self-criticism we must refer particularly to the stomach, 
and indeed I wonder if anyone breaks free of this mistress before he 
dies. 

Gluttony is hypocrisy of the stomach. Filled, it moans about scar- 
city; stuffed, and crammed, it wails about its hunger. Gluttony thinks 
up sea.sonings, creates sweet recipes. Stop up one urge and another 
bursts out; stop that one and you unleash yet another. Gluttony has a 
deceptive appearance; it eats moderately but wants to gobble every- 
thing at the same time. A stuffed belly produces fornication, while a 
mortified stomach leads to purity. The man who pets a lion may tame 
it but the man who coddles the body makes it ravenous. 

The Jew celebrates on Sabbaths and feast days. The gluttonous 
monk celebrates on Saturdays and Sundays.^^ He counts the days to 
Easter, and for days in advance he gets the food ready. The slave of 
the belly ponders the menu with which to celebrate the feast. The 
servant of God, however, thinks of the graces that may enrich him, 

If a visitor calls, then the slave of gluttony engages in charitable 
acts— but for the reasons associated with his love of food. He thinks 
that l)y allowing rcla.vations for himself, he is bringing consolation (o 
his brother. He thinks that the duties of hospitality cniillc liiiii to 



</. On tin- |)rnhjliiii<iii -il' t^Miny i,ri Silt ur(Liy% and Siiiul.u'- mt |uliri (limtliin, /« 
UlUltf! II, IK. 



lA,^ 



JOIINCLIMACUS 



help himself to sonic uiiu', sn ihat while apparently hiding his virtu- 
ous love of temperance, lie is .u-tmilly ii.rninj; into a slave of intem- 
perance. 

Vanity and gluttony sometimes vie with one another and they 
struggle for the poor monk as if he uere an ac(]uired slave. The one 
tells him he should take it easy and the other suggests that he ought to 
emerge virtuously triumphant over his urge to gratify his appetite. A 
sensible monk, however, will avoid both vices, using one to repulse 
the other. 

As long as the flesh is in full vigor, we should everywhere and at 
all times cultivate temperance, and when it has been tamed—some- 
thing I doubt can happen this side of the grave— we should hide our 
achievement. 

I have seen elderly priests tricked by demons so that on feast days 
they dispensed the young men with a blessing, though they were not 
in their charge, from abstinence from wine and so on. Now if priests 
giving such permission are quite clearly holy men, we may indulge. 
But within limits. If such priests tend to be careless, then we should 
Ignore the permission they give, and we should do so especially if we 
are in the thick of the fight against the flesh. 

I remember the case of Evagrius.^s whom an evil demon led to 
the notion that of all men he was the most sensible in all he thought 
and said. The poor man was quite mistaken, of course, and in this 
matter as in many others he proved himself outstandingly foolish. He 
says: "When our soul wants different foods, keep it on bread and wa- 
ter,"5a" a statement that is like telling a child to climb the entire lad- 
der in a single stride. So let us reject him and say: When our soul 
wants different foods, it is looking for what is proper to its nature. 
Hence, we have to be very cunning in the way we deal with this most 
skillful opponent. Unless we are caught up in some crisis or unless we 
happen to be doing penance for some particular failings, what we 



.58. Evagrius Ponticus (c. 345-399) left a promising ecclesiastical career in Constan- 
tinople to become a monk first in Palestine and then in Egypt, where he spent two 
years in Nitna and fourteen at the Cells. He became there the leading theoretical exp<,- 
nent of the monastic life. His Origenist cosmology led to his condemnation at the Fifth 
Lcumenical Council of 55 3. But his ascetic theology, with its .sharp distinction between 
action and contemplation, its list of eight principal temptations, and its account of dis- 
passion leading to love, remained fundamental for monasticism. Climacu.s, in spite .)f 
his abuse of E\agrius, is clearly much influenced by him (see the Preface, p. rtO), 

5Sa. Evagrius, Pructkus 16 (ed. Guillaumont, Smirtres chretiennes 171, p, 54(1). 



\M, 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENl 



ought to do is to deny ourselves fattening foods, then foods that warm 
us up, then whatever happens to make our food especially pleasant. 
Give yourself food that is satisfying and easily digestible, thereby 
counteracting endless hunger by giving yourself plenty. In this way 
we may be freed from too great a longing for food as though from a 
plague by rapid evacuation. And we should note too that most food 
that inflates the stomach also encourages desire. 

Be sure to laugh at the demon who, when supper is over, says 
that in future you should eat later, for you may be sure that at the 
ninth hour he will change the arrangements made on the previous 
day. 

There is one sort of temperance for those of good conduct and 
another for those inclined to particular weaknesses. Among the for- 
mer any kind of bodily stirring evokes an immediate urge to restraint, 
while among the latter there is no relief or relaxation from such stir- 
rings until the very day they die. The former strive always for peace 
of mind, but the latter try to appease God by their spiritual grief and 
their contrition. , 

Joy and consolation descend on the perfect when they reach the 
state of complete detachment. The warrior monk enjoys the heat of 
battle, but the slave of passion revels in the celebrations of Easter. ^9 

In his heart, the glutton dreams only of food and provisions 
whereas all who have the gift of mourning think only of judgment 
and of punishment. 

Control your appetites^-o before they control you, and shame will 
greatly help you to maintain such mastery. Those who have tumbled 
headlong into the pit of sin know what I am talking about, and indeed 
only the eunuch is without such knowledge.* ^ So let us restrain our 
appetites with the thought of the fire to come. Some have been so 
mightily enslaved by their appetites that they actually cut off their 
own genitals, and thereby died twice over." For the truth is, as one 



59. Laterally: "the Feast of feasts and Festival of festivals." 

M). l^iterally: "the belly." Among the ascetic writers gluttony and lust arc ai«-avs 
closely connected. 

ftl. "The eunuchs are those of whom the Lord said that they have imulc lin-iu 
selves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake (Matt. 19:12), and who are praclicind ii 
general absiineiKe. For the other kind of eunuchs do not differ at all (nun ordiimry 
men as far as the passions into which they fall arc concerned" (scholion I 1 IH7r>H|) 

A2. I.e., physically and .spiritually; the 24th Apostolic Canon seiilciiir* ,i U\u\m\ 
w ho rniililiiies himself lo three years' di')>rivalion of Commiiiiioii 



IA7 



JOIINCMMACUS 



will discover, thai llic liL-lly is ilu- cause of all human shipwreck. 

A fasting man prays austerely, liui the mind of someone intem- 
perate is filled up with uticlean inia^Miiinys. 

A full stomach dries up one's weeping, whereas the shrivelled 
stomach produces these tears. And the man who looks after his belly 
and at the same time hopes to control the spirit of fornication is like 
someone trying to put out a fire with oil. 

Begrudge the stomach and your heart will be humbled; please 
the stomach and your mind will turn proud. And if you watch your- 
self early in the morning, at midday, and in the hour before dinner, 
you will discover the value of fasting, for in the morning your 
thoughts are lively, by the sixth hour they have grown quieter and by 
sundown they are finally calm. If you can begrudge the stomach, 
your mouth will stay closed, because the tongue flourishes where 
food is abundant. Fight as hard as you can against the stomach and let 
your vigilance hold it in. Make the effort, however little, and the 
Lord will quickly come to help you. 

If leather bottles are kept supple, they can hold more; but they do 
not hold so much if they are neglected. The man who stuffs food into 
his stomach expands his insides, whereas the man who fights his 
stomach causes it to shrink, and once it has shrunk there is no possi- 
bility of overeating, so that henceforth one fasts quite naturally. 

Sometimes thirst quenches thirst, but it is difficult if not impossi- 
ble to end hunger by means of hunger. And if the stomach triumphs 
over you, tame it with hard work, and if you are too weak for this, 
fight it by keeping vigil. If you find yourself getting sleepy, turn to 
manual work, but keep away from that if you happen not to be 
sleepy, for you cannot serve both God and Mammon." That is to say, 
you cannot turn your attention at the same time to God and to the 
work of your hands. 

You should remember that frequently a demon can take up resi- 
dence in your belly and keep a man from being satisfied, even after 
having devoured the whole of Egypt and after having drunk all of the 
Nile. After we have eaten, this demon goes off and sends the spirit of 
fornication against us, saying: "Get him now! Go after him. When his 
stomach is full, he will not put up much of a fight." Laughing, the 
spirit of fornication, that ally of the stomach's demon, comes, binds us 



63. Monks supported themselves by the sale of their handiwork. 



168 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



hand and foot in sleep, does anything he wants with us, befouls body 
and soul with his dirty dreams and emissions. 

It IS truly astounding how the incorporeal mind can be defiled 
and darkened by the body. Equally astonishing is the fact that the im- 
material spirit can be purified and refined by clay. 

If you have promised Christ to travel the straight and narrow 
road, then keep your stomach in check; for if you give in to it, if you 
enlarge it, you are breaking your promise. Listen and hear the word 
of warning: "Wide and spacious is the road of gluttony. It leads to the 
catastrophe of fornication, and there are many who travel that way. 
The gate is narrow and the way of fasting is hard, that way leading to 
the life of purity, and there are few to make the journey" (cf. Matt 
7:13-14). 

The fallen Lucifer is prince of the demons, and gluttony is 
prince of the passions. So when you sit at a well-laden table, remem- 
ber death and remember judgment, and eveft then you will only man- 
age to restrain yourself a little. And when you drink, keep always in 
mind the vinegar and gall of your Lord. Tiien indeed you will be ei- 
ther temperate or sighing; you will keep your mind humble. For you 
must not fool yourself. You will not escape from Pharaoh and you 
will not see the heavenly Passover unless you constantly eat bitter 
herbs and unleavened bread, the bitter herbs of toil and hard fasting, 
the unleavened bread of a mind made humble. Join to your breathing 
the word of him who said: "When devils plagued me, I put on sack- 
cloth, humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer stuck to the bo- 
som of my soul" (Ps. 34:13). 

To fast is to do violence to nature. It is to do away what whatever 
pleases the palate. Fasting ends lust, roots out bad thoughts, frees one 
from evil dreams. Fasting makes for purity of prayer, an enlightened 
soul, a watchful mind, a deliverance from blindness. Fasting is the 
door of compunction, humble sighing, joyful contrition, and end to 
chatter, an occasion for silence, a custodian of obedience, a lightening 
of sleep, health of the body, an agent of dispassion, a remission of sins, 
the gate, indeed, the delight of Paradise. 

Let us put a question to this enemy of ours, this architect of our 
misfortunes, this gateway of passion, this fall of Adam and ruin of 
E.sau, this destroyer of the Israelites, this one who bares the sliatiic of 
Noah, this betrayer of Gomorrah, this reproach of Lot, thi.s killer nt 
the sons of Kli the priest, this guide to every uncleatincss. Let ns nfik 



\(>'f 



JOIINCI.IMACUS 



her from whom she is l.orri, who ht-r childrt-n are, what enemy there 
IS to crush her, who lirirtlly bnnf^s hrr low. Let us ask this bane of all 
men, this purchaser of everything with the gold coin of greed: "How 
did you gain access to us? lo what does your coming lead? How do 
you depart from us?" 

Angered by such abuse, raging and foaming, (jiuttony answers 
us: "Why are you complaining, you who are my servants? How is it 
that you are trying to get away from me? Nature has bound me to 
you. The door for me is what food actually is, its character and quali- 
ty. The reason for my being insatiable is habit. Unbroken habit, dull- 
ness of soul, and the failure to remember death are the roots of my 
passion. And how is it that you are looking for the names of my off- 
spnng? For if I were to count them, their number would be greater 
than the total of the grains of sand. Still, you may learn at least the 
names of my firstborn and beloved children. My firstborn son is the 
servant of Fornication, the second is Hardness of Heart, and the third 
IS Sleepiness. From me flow a sea of Dirty Thoughts, waves of Filth, 
floods of unknown and unspeakable Impurities. My daughters are La- 
ziness, Talkativeness, Breezy Familiarity, Jesting, Facetiousness, Con- 
tradiction, Stubbornness, Contempt, Disobedience, Stolidity of Mind, 
Captivity, Boastfulness, Audacity, Love of Worldly Things, followed 
by Impure Prayer, Distracted Thoughts, and sudden and often unex- 
pected Catastrophes, with which is linked that most evil of all my 
daughters, namely, Despair. The thought of past failings is an obsta- 
cle to me, but hardly overcomes me. The thought of death is my ene- 
my always, but nothing human can really wipe me out. He who has 
received the Paraclete prays to Him against me; and the Paraclete, 
when entreated, does not allow me to act passionately. But those who 
have never tasted Him inevitably seek pleasure in my sweetness." 

\'ictory over this vice is a brave one. He who is able to achieve it 
should hasten towards dispassion and total chastity. 



170 



Step IS 



ON CHASTITY 



We have heard from that raving mistress gluttony, who has just 
spoken, that her offspring is war against bodies. And no wonder, for 
our ancient ancestor Adam also teaches us this. Indeed if he had' not 
been overcome by the belly he would not have known what a wife 
was. Therefore tho.se who keep the first commandment do not fall 
into the second transgression, but remain sons of Adam without 
knowing what Adam was. They were made a little lower than the an- 
gels (cf. Ps. 8:6) in being subject to death.&* And this was to prevent 
evil from becoming immortal, as he who is called the Theologian 
says.***^ 

To be chaste is to put on the nature of an incorporeal being. ^'S 
Chastity is a supernatural denial of what one is by nature, so that a 
mortal and corruptible body is competing in a truly marvelous way 
with incorporeal spirits. A chaste man is someone who has driven out 
bodily love by means of divine love, who has used heavenly fire to 
quench the fires of the flesh. 



64. The words "in being subject to death" do not occur in winif versions, 

fi4a. St. Gregory of Nazianzus, Or. 4S, 8 U'G 56, 63.1 A). 

^.5. RaJer's text is tran.slated here although a .sentence hav iiiul.iiiblrdlv .lni|>l)pd 
am. irtM add.s: "I'urily i.s thi- loiigcd-fiir house of Christ and the i-arthlv lir.ivi-n nt ih« 
hcuri." Kader'f. own Latin iiaiislaii.m reads; "I'uritv is the longed (ur lioiiir of (liriit 
and lhe<-aMlilv shield <il ilir ju-ari "(/'(, KH, H7y|)), ,« 



171 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



Chastity is a name coiiimon Id all viriiics. 

A chaste man feels no stirrings or change within himself even 
when he is asleep. A chaste man is toinpletejy oblivious to the differ- 
ence between bodies. 

The rule and Hmit of absolute chastity is to have the same feel- 
ings regarding animate and inanimate beings, rational and irrational. 

Anyone trained in chastity should give himself no credit for any 
achievements, for a man cannot conquer what he actually is. When 
nature is overcome, it should be admitted that this is due to Him Who 
is above nature, since it cannot be denied that the weaker always 
yields to the stronger. 

The beginning of chastity is refusal to consent to evil thoughts 
and occasional dreamless emissions; the middle stage is to be free of 
dreams and emissions even when there are natural movements of the 
body brought on by eating too much; the completion of chastity 
comes when mortified thoughts are followed by a mortified body. 

Truly blessed is the man totally unstirred by any body, any color 
or any beauty. The chaste man is not someone with a body undefiled 
but rather a person whose members are in complete subjection to the 
soul, for a man is great who is free of passion even when touched, 
though greater still is the man unhurt by all he has looked on. Such a 
man has truly mastered the fires of earthly beauty by his attention 
concentrated on the beauties of heaven. In driving off this dog by 
means of prayer he is like someone who has been fighting a lion. He 
who subdues it by resistance to it is someone still chasing an enemy. 
But the man who has managed to reduce its hold completely, even 
when he himself is still in this life, is someone who has already risen 
from the dead. 

A sign of real chastity is to be unaffected by the dreams that 
come with sleep. Equally, a sign of complete sensuality is to be bable 
to emissions from bad thoughts when one is awake. 

The man who struggles against this enemy by sweat and bodily 
hardships is like someone who has tied his adversary with a reed. If 
he fights him with temperance, sleeplessness, and keeping watch, it is 
as if he had put fetters on him. If he fights with humility, calmness, 
and thirst, it is as though he had killed the enemy and buried him in 
sand, the sand being lowliness since it does nothing to feed the pas- 
sions and is only earth and ashes. 

One man keeps this tormentor under control by struggling hard, 
another by being humble, another by divine revelation. 'I'hc first man 



172 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



is hke the star of morning, the second tike the moon when it is full, 
the third like the blazing sun. And all three have their home in heav- 
en. Light comes from the dawn and amid light the sun rises, so let all 
that has been said be the light in which to meditate and learn. 

A fox pretends to be asleep; the body and the demons pretend to 
be chaste. The former is on the watch to seize a bird, the latter to 
catch a soul. So as long as you live, never trust that clay of which you 
are made and never depend on it until the time you stand before 
Christ Himself. And never imagine that abstinence will keep you 
from falling. It was a being who never ate that was nevertheless 
thrown out of heaven. 

Some wise men have said that renunciation is hostility to the 
body and war against the stomach. 

Among beginners lapses usually occur because of high living, 
something that, together with arrogance, brings down also those who 
have made some progress. But among those nearing perfection, a 
lapse is solely due to the fact of passing judgment on one's neighbor. 

Some have praised those who are naturally eunuchs. They say of 
them that they have been freed from the martyrdom of the body. But 
as far as I am concerned my praise goes out each day to those who 
take the knife, so to speak, to their own evil thoughts. 

I have seen men who lapsed against their will and I have seen 
men who would willingly lapse but are unable to do so. These I pity 
far more than the daily sinner, for though impotent they long for cor- 
ruption. 

Pity the man who falls, but pity twice over the man who causes 
another to lapse, for he carries the burden of both as well as the 
weight of pleasure tasted by the other. 

Do not imagine that you will overwhelm the demon of fornica- 
tion by entering into an argument with him. Nature is on his side and 
he has the best of the argument. So the man who decides to struggle 
against his flesh and to overcome it by his own efforts is fighting in 
vain. The truth is that unless the Lord overturns the house of the 
flesh and builds the house of the soul, the man wishing to overcome it 
has watched and fasted for nothing. Offer up to the Lord the weak- 
ness of your nature. Admit your incapacity and, without your know- 
ing it, you will win for yourself the gift of chastity. 

A victim of .sensuality who had overcome his weakness lold me 
once that within people of his kind there flourishes a ycaiiiin^ i<>r 
bodies, a shameless and terrible spirit that asserts itself ni ilii- vrry 



\7\ 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



heart's core. Sheer physical puin burns so fiercely in the heart that it 
is like being scorched by an <.|K-n fire. The sufferer finds that because 
of this he has no fear of (iod, he spurns ihc thought of punishment, 
turns away from prayer, and the sighi of a corpse moves him no more 
than if it were a stone. He is like sonieonc out of his mind, in a daze, 
and he is perpetually drunk with desire f<ir man or beast. And if a 
limit were not placed on the activities of this demon, no one would be 
saved, no one who is made of clay mingled with blood and foul mois- 
ture. How could they be saved? After all, everything created longs in- 
satiably for its own kind, blood for blood, the worm for a worm, clay 
for clay. And what does flesh desire if not flesh? 

Those of us who try to restrain nature and who long to take the 
kingdom of heaven by force (cf. Matt. 11:12) try various artifices 
again.st this demon. Lucky the man who has not experienced the kind 
of conflict I have been talking about! So let us pray that we may al- 
ways escape from such a trial because those who slide into the pit fall 
far below those others climbing up and down the ladder. ^^ \j^^ in- 
deed they have to sweat copiously and practice extreme abstinence if 
they are ever to get far enough out of that pit to be able to start the 
climb again. 

When our spiritual foes are drawn up to do battle with us, we 
should ponder what it is they can do, just as we would take precau- 
tions in a visible war. For those foes have their proper tasks, strange 
as this may seem. And whenever I thought about those who were 
tempted. I noted that their lapses were of varying seriousness. "He 
who has ears to hear, let him hear" (Matt. ]1;15). 

In his battle against ascetics and those leading the solitary life, 
the devil regularly uses all his force, zeal, and low skill, all his in- 
trigue, cleverness, and evil designs to overpower them by means that 
are unnatural rather than according to nature, And so it happens that 
when ascetics meet women and find themselves assailed neither by 
desire nor by evil thoughts, they occasionally come to imagine that 
they have achieved true blessedness. Poor idiots! They do not realize 
that a smaller lapse was not required since a major fall had in fact 
been prepared for them. 

Those accursed murderers, in my opinion, manage to attack us 
poor wretches and bring us down with unnatural sins for the follow- 



66. I.e., the angels whom Jacob saw in his dream ascending and descending a lad- 
der reaching up to heaven (Gen. 28:12). 



174 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



ing two reasons: first, that everywhere we may have plenty of oppor- 
tunity for lapses; and second, that we may receive greater 
punishment. The truth of all this was personally discovered by the 
man who formerly was in charge of donkeys but then wretchedly fell 
under the sway of wild donkeys and was deluded. He had once fed on 
the bread of heaven but now he lost it, and even after he had repent- 
ed, our founder Antony said,^*^ with bitter lament, that a great pillar 
had fallen. That wise man drew a veil over the nature of the sin, and 
he knew well that the sin of fornication does not require the availabil- 
ity of another body. 

We carry a sort of death within us, a sin that is catastrophic, al- 
ways with us and especially when we are young. I have not the cour- 
age to describe it, for my hand is restrained by him who said it is a 
shame to talk of, write about, or hear of the things done by them in 
secret (cf. Eph. 5:12). 

This flesh of mine, and yet not mine, this enemy and friend, was 
called death by Paul, "Who will deliver me from this body of death?" 
he asked (Rom. 7:24). Another theologian^^idescribed it as passionate, 
slavish and nocturnal. For a long time I wondered why they spoke 
this way. If, as was said above, the flesh is death, then whoever defeats 
it will surely not die. And yet, who is the man who will live and not 
see death in all the impurity of his body? 

I ask you to consider who is greater, the man who dies and rises 
again, or the man who does not die at all. Those who would pick the 
latter are certainly wrong, for Christ Himself died and rose. But he 
who opts for the former suggests in effect that one should not despair 
over the dying, or, rather, the lapsing. 

Our relentless enemy, the teacher of fornication, whispers that 
God is lenient and particularly merciful to this passion, since it is so 
very natural. Yet if we watch the wiles of the demons we will observe 
that after we have actually sinned they will affirm that God is a just 
and inexorable judge. They say one thing to lead us into sin, another 
thing to overwhelm us in despair. And if we are sorrowful or inclined 
to despair, we are slower to sin again, but when the sorrow and the 
despair have been quenched, the tyrannical demon begins to speak to 
us again of God's mercy. 



H. 



rt6a. A rclurcncr ic> Si. .■\iiiiinv ilie f I'riMt: /'hi' SiDiini;! iif ihc Ikstit l'iil/itt\, Aiiliiiiy 
ft7. Si. (ircyory nt Nii/i4iii/.ii)(; il th 4S, n (l'(, 16, M-fAH) 



\7i 



JOHN CMMACUS 



I he Lord, being iiKiirni|)til)lr ;itui incorporeal, rejoices in the 
purity and cleanliness of our hndirs. As lur the demons, nothing is 
said to please them more th:in ilie loul .smell <jl' Cornication, and noth- 
ing delights them as much as the defilement of the body. 

Chastity makes us as familiar with (Jud and as like Him as any 
man may be. 

The mother of sweetness is earth and dew. The mother of chasti- 
ty is stillness and obedience. Often the dispa.ssion of body attained by 
stillness has been disturbed whenever the world impinged on it. But 
dispassion achieved through obedience is genuine and is everywhere 
unshakable. 

I have seen humility emerge from pride, and I thought of the 
man who said: "Who has fathomed the mind of the Lord?" (Rom. 
11: 34). The pit and the fruit of arrogance is a fail; but a fall is often an 
occasion of humility for those willing to profit by it. 

The man who imagines he can conquer the demon of fornication 
by gluttony and by stuffing himself is quite like someone who 
quenches fire with oil. And the man who tries to put an end to this 
struggle by means of temperance only is like someone trying to es- 
cape from the sea by swimming with just one hand. However, join 
humility to temperance, for the one is useless without the other. 

The man who observes himself succumbing to some passion 
should first of all fight against this, especially if it has made its abode 
with him, for until this particular vice is wiped out it will be useless 
for us to have mastered other passions. Kill this Egyptian and we will 
surely have sight of God in the bush of humility (cf. Exod. 2:12; 3:2). 
In the season of temptation I had the feeling that this wolf was 
giving me joy, tears, and indeed consolation in my spirit. Of course I 
was being deceived when I childishly imagined that I was deriving 
benefit instead of harm from this. 

Every other kind of sin is external to the body, but the sin of im- 
purity is a sin against the body, since the very substance of the flesh is 
defiled by pollution in a way that cannot happen in the case of other 
sins. And a good question to ask is this: "Why do we normally say re- 
garding every other kind of sin that so-and-so has slipped, whereas we 
say sorrowfully that someone has fallen when we di.scover that he has 
committed fornication?" 

A fish turns swiftly from the hook. The passionate .soul turns 
from solitude. 

When the devil decides to forge some disgraceful bond between 



176 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



two people, he goes to work on the inclinations of each of them — and 
then lights the fire of passion. 

It often seems that those who incline towards sensuality tend to 
be sympathetic, merciful, and possessed of compunction, while those 
eager for chastity appear to lack these capacities in some measure. 

A very well-informed man once put this question to me: "Leav- 
ing aside murder and the denial of God, what is the most serious of 
sins?" 

"To lapse into heresy," I replied. 

"In that case," he said, "why does the Catholic Church readmit 
heretics who have honestly come to reject their beliefs? Why are they 
deemed fit to share in the holy Mysteries when, by contrast, a man 
who has committed fornication is excluded from these sacred Myster- 
ies for a number of years, and this by the direct command of the 
Apostolic Canons, even though he may have not only confessed but 
even abandoned his sinful ways?" The question astonished me, and I 
still do not know the answer. ^'^ 

During the singing of the psalms wcj should examine, consider, 
and observe what kind of sweetness comes to us from the devil of for- 



68. When the .same question was put to Timothy of Alexandria (archbishop 380-5) 
he replied: "Because the one, the sin of the heretic, is connmirted with the free co-oper- 
ation of the will through ignorance; and so the Church's discipline is designed to make 
heretics more ready to return and fornicators less eager to sin" iResp. Can. 20, in J.B. 
Pitra, luris Eccltsiastict Groecorum Histaria et Alonumenta, vol. i, p. 635). The canonical po- 
sition seems to have been as follows. F.-Kclusion from Communion was a penitential dis- 
cipline for those who had sinned after baptism (i.e., for those who were already in the 
Church). The Apostolic Penitential Canons prescribed seven years' deprivation of 
Communion for fornicators. Heretics were deemed outside the Church. They were 
bapti/.ed and chrismated on reception and could then proceed to Communion without 
further delay (cf. Canon 7 of Laodicea). However, those heretics who had lapsed after 
receiving Catholic Baptism and who then returned to the Church had to spend three 
years In the catechumenate, followed by a further ten years without Communion un- 
les.s their repentance was especially fervent (cf. Canon 12 of Slicaea). Heretics were 
therefore not treated so much more leniently than fornicators, The point was that the 
former, if they had not previously been Catholics, were not liable to disciplinary mea- 
sures. The scholiast to account for the apparently more serious nature of fornicaiion 
suggests the following: "Heresv is a deviation of the mind and a ministry of llie looj^ur, 
whence comes error. I'ornication seduces and transforms all the senses and tai uities ol 
the body and soul, changing them from the image and likeness and cj.sting ihcin iiilii 
nothingness; therefore it is iilso called a fall. Heresy comes from pre!iuni()Mon, wlldc 
fornication comes from Ijodily comfort Herelics therefore aiiain prrfceUim lhri"tn(ll 
luiiniliation, sensualists lhroii|jh Imdily arriiction" (scliolion ^6 !'/t.'l) ''I IA|) 



177 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



nication and what kind comes In us from the words of the Spirit and 
from the grace and power which is in (hem. Know yourself well, 
young man. For in fact I have seen men pray earnestly for their loved 
ones, men who thought they were fulfilling the requirements of love, 
when in reality it was the spirit of fornication that was stirring them. 

The body can be defiled by the merest touch, for of all the senses 
this is the most dangerous. So think of the man who wrapped his 
hand in an ecclesiastical garment when he was about to carry his sick 
mother.^**" Let your hand be dead to everything natural or otherwise, 
to your own body or to that of another. 

I do not think anyone should be classed as a saint until he has 
made holy his body, if indeed that is possible. 

We have to be especially sober and watchful when we are lying 
in bed, for that is the time when our mind has to contend with de- 
mons outside our body. And if our body is inclined to be sensual then 
it will easily betray us. So let the remembrance of death and the con- 
cise Jesus Prayer go to sleep with you and get up with you, for noth- 
ing helps you as these do when you are asleep. 

Some think that struggles with passion and ejaculations during 
sleep are caused solely by what we have eaten. Yet I have noticed that 
very sick people or strict practitioners of fasting can also fall prey to 
these defilements. I once asked a very experienced and celebrated 
monk about this, and the holy man clearly explained the matter to 
me. "Emissions during sleep are the result of eating too much and liv- 
ing too well," this famous man declared. "They come too when we 
get complacent or when we preen ourselves because a long time may 
have elapsed since we experienced such emissions. They come also if 
we start passing judgment on our neighbor. The last two problems 
can occur even among the sick, and perhaps all three." If someone dis- 
covers that he is untroubled by these, he is surely lucky to be free of 
such passions. And if ever he suffers it, the reason must lie in the jeal- 
ousy of the demons, something God allows to happen for a while in 
order that this man, after such an accident, which of course is free 
from sin, may achieve the purest humility. 

Never brood by day over the fantasies that have occurred to you 



6Ka. Rosweyde, yitue Patntm v, ^ 68, p. .i72: PL 73, 873B; ed. Nau, $ i5a: Revue i!e 
! 'Orient Chretien xiii (19Q8), p. .i2. 



178 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN'I 



during sleep, for the aim of the demons is to defile us while we are 
still awake by causing us to harp on our dreams. 

Let us pay attention to another trick of our enemies. Just as bad 
food makes one sick after some time or indeed after some days, the 
same can happen in the case of actions that defile the soul. I have seen 
men give way to soft living and not notice at once the onset of the 
enemy. I have seen others take a meal with women, talk to them, and 
all the time be unafflicted by bad thoughts of any kind. In this way 
they were deceived and encouraged to grow careless and to imagine 
that they were safe and at peace. Then came sudden destruction in 
their cells. What bodily and spiritual destruction afflicts us when we 
are alone? The man who suffers temptation knows well. And the man 
who goes about untempted has no need to know. 

When temptation comes, our best weapons are sackcloth and 
ashes, all-night vigils standing up, hunger, the merest touch of water 
when we are thirsty, time passed among the burial places of the dead, 
and most important of all, humility of heart; and if possible a spiritual 
director or a helpful brother, old in wisdom rather than years, should 
also support us. Indeed it would come as a great surprise if anyone 
could, by his efforts alone, save his ship from the sea. 

The same sin earns punishment a hundred times greater for one 
person rather than another, depending on character, place, progress, 
and much else besides. 

I was told once about an astonishing level of chastity attained by 
someone. "There was a man*^ who, having looked on a body of great 
beauty, at once gave praise to its Creator and after one look was 
stirred to love God and to weep copiously, so that it was marvelous 
how something that could have brought low one person managed to 
be the cause of a heavenly crown for another. And if such a man feels 
and behaves in similar fashion on similar occasions, then he has al- 
ready risen to immortality before the general resurrection." 

The same guideline ought to direct us when we sing songs and 
hymns, for the lovers of God are moved to holy joy, divine love, and 
tears by songs both worldly and spiritual, just as lovers of pleasure 
are moved to the opposite. 

Some solitary monks, as I have said already, have to face vastly 



fiV. St. Nonrui'., Iiishoii i>) I li-lin]>nlis (Kn^wcydf, < ilie I'lilriim I, ]i, 177: /'/, 7.1, ftftt), 



179 



JOHNCLIMACUS 



more dangerous attacks {'rom ilu- deinotis. And no wonder, since 
these are the places where the devils fhoose to lurk, because the Lord, 
out of concern for us, has driven them to desert places''" and to the 
dark reaches of hell. The devils of fornication launch vicious attacks 
on solitary monks. They try to drive them back into the world, by 
making them think that their time in the desert has been wasted. Dev- 
ils do not bother us when we are in the world, and this is because 
they think that, if we are not attacked there, we will continue to stay 
with worldly-minded people. The place of temptation is the place 
where we find ourselves having to put up a bitter fight against the 
enemy, and wherever we are not involved in a struggle is surely the 
place where the enemy is posing as a friend. 

If we have to go out into the world on some legitimate task, we 
have the hand of God to guard us, probably because our spiritual di- 
rector is praying that we may not be a cause of blasphemy against the 
Lord. Sometimes we are protected by our insensitivity or by the fact 
that long experience has exhausted for us the spectacle of the world, 
its sounds and all its works. But sometimes the reason lies in the fact 
that the devils have left deliberately so that only the demon of pride 
remains to take over from all of them. 

But all of you who wish to practice purity and preserve it should 
listen now to another cunning stratagem of that deceiver, for I have 
been told by someone who had to suffer the experience that the de- 
mon of sensuality often hid himself completely. Then he would have 
a monk sit or talk with women. He would inspire him with great pi- 
ety and even a flood of tears, and then suggest that he speak about the 
remembrance of death, judgment, and chastity. The unfortunate 
women, deceived by his words and spurious piety, would rush to 
him, thinking him to be a shepherd instead of the wolf he really was. 
Acquaintance would grow into familiarity, and the wretched monk 
would suffer his downfall. 

,We should strive in all possible ways neither to see nor to hear of 
that fruit we have vowed never to taste. It amazes me to think we 
could imagine ourselves to be stronger than the prophet David, some- 
thing quite impossible indeed (cf. 2 Kings [2 Sam.] 11:2^). 

Purity deserves such great and mighty praise that some of the Fa- 



70. It was a common idea that demons dwelt in the desert; solitaries wetn then 
partly to do battle with them. 



180 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



thers have actually dared to call it freedom from passion. But there 
are some who would claim that anyone who has tasted sin can never 
be called pure. I disagree, and for the following reason. You can easily 
graft a good olive onto a wild olive if you so wish. Now if the keys of 
the kingdom had been given to someone who had lived always in vir- 
ginity, the claim mentioned above might have some force. But let the 
proponents of the claim be silenced by the man who had a mother-in- 
law and who nevertheless received the keys of the kingdom after he 
had become pure.'' 

The serpent of sensuality has many faces. To those who have had 
no experience of sin he suggests the idea of trying it once and then 
stopping. Then the crafty creature, exploiting the recollection of hav- 
ing sinned once, urges them to try again. And many of the people 
without experience feel no conflict within themselves because they 
do not know what is evil, whereas the experienced, knowing the evil 
for what it is, suffer disturbance and conflict, though sometimes the 
opposite can happen too. 

When we rise from sleep in a good and peaceful frame of mind, 
we may assume that this is a secret gift frorn the heavenly angels, par- 
ticularly if we had gone to sleep after much prayer and vigil. Some- 
times, however, we get up in a bad mood, and this is caused by bad 
dreams and fantasies. For "I have seen the enemy all puffed up, high 
and tossing in me like the cedars of Lebanon" (Ps. 36:35) and I passed 
by with temperance, and see, his rage was not as it had been before, 
and I looked for him with humble mind and no place or trace of him 
could be found in me. 

To have mastered one's body is to have taken command of na- 
ture, which is surely to have risen above it. And the man who has 
done this is not much lower than the angels, if even that. 

That spirit should fight with spirit is not surprising. The real 
wonder is that a man dwelling in his body, and always struggling 
against this hostile and canny matter, should manage to rout spiritual 
foes. 

The great concern of the good Lord for us is shown by the fact 
that shyness acts as a curb on the shamelessness of women. For if the 
woman chased the man, no flesh would be saved. 

Among the discerning Fathers, distinctions are recogn i/.cd be- 



71. I'etcr was itiarrieil; see Mm. 16;!^, l.iikc 4:.iS ;ind I Cor. '^;,'. 



IKI 



JOHN CI.IMACUS 



cween provocation, coupling, usscnt, captivity, struggle, and the dis- 
ease called passion, vi/hich is in tlic soul.''' These blessed Fathers say 
that provocation is a simple word or inuige encountered for the first 
time, which has entered into the heart. (Coupling is conversation with 
what has been encountered, whether this he passionately or other- 
wise. Assent is the delighted yielding of the soul to what it has en- 
countered. Captivity is a forcible and iniuilling abduction of the 
heart, a permanent lingering with what we have encountered and 
which totally undermines the necessary order of our souls. By strug- 
gle they mean force equal to that which is leading the attack, and this 
force wins or loses according to the desires of the spirit. Passion, in 
their view, is properly something that lies hidden for a long time in 
the soul and by its very presence it takes on the character of a habit, 
until the soul of its own accord clings to it with affection. 

The first of these conditions is free of sin, the second sometimes, 
and the condition of the soul determines whether or not the third is 
sinful. Struggle can earn a crown or punishment, Captivity is judged 
in different ways, depending on whether it happens at the time of 
prayer or at some other time, whether it happens in regard to what is 
unimportant or in the context of evil thoughts. But passion is un- 
equivocally denounced in every situation and requires suitable repen- 
tance or future punishment. From all of which it follows that he who 
regards the first encounter with detachment cuts off with one blow 
all the rest that follow. 

The most exact of the spiritual Fathers point to another more 
subtle notion, something they call pararripismos, or disturbance'-' of 
the mind. What happens is this. In a moment, without a word being 
spoken or an image presented, a sudden passionate urge lays hold of 
the victim. It comes faster than anything in the physical world and is 
swifter and more indiscernible than any spirit. It makes its appear- 
ance in the soul by a simple memory, which is unconnected with any- 
thing, independent of time and inexpressible, and in some cases 
comes without the person himself realizing the fact. Someone who 



72. Sec, for example, St. Mark the Ascetic, On the Spiritual La'j;, §5 l.'y-42 [I'd 6\ 
921-4: E'l' Phil., 55 l.!K-4l, pp.! 19-20), and St. Maximos the Confessor, ()» f.oir, 1 «4, II 
31 {FG yo, 980. 99.!; FT '/'he Philokalia, vol. ii). There is a valuable analysis of the terms 
which Climacus uses in the Glossary of I'he Philokulia, vol. i, pp. 364-6. 

7 J. This is an expression used by St. Mark the Ascetic, Letter to Nicolas the Solitary, 
I'G 65, 104tlB (ET Phil. p. I.f3). 



182 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



has been able to detect such a subtlety, someone with the gift of 
mourning, may be able to explain how with the eye alone, with a 
mere glance, by the touch of a hand, through a song overheard, the 
soul is led to commit a definite sin of unchastity without any notion 
or evil thought. 

Some say that it is the thought of fornication that introduces pas- 
sion into the body, while others deny this, insisting that evil thoughts 
derive from the capacity of the body to experience things sensual. 
The former declare that if the mind had not taken the lead, the body 
would not have followed.'^" But the latter maintain that their view is 
proved by the depravity of bodily passion, for, very often, a pleasing 
sight, a touch of the hand, the scent of perfume, or the sound of sweet 
voices can be enough to generate evil thoughts. If anyone can do so in 
the Lord, let him explain what really happens. It would greatly bene- 
fit those living actively to understand this, though this problem need 
not really concern those practicing virtue with simple hearts. Still, 
not everyone has the necessary degree of understanding and not ev- 
eryone possesses the holy simplicity that is^a breastplate against the 
cunning of evil demons. 

Some passions enter the body by way of the soul, and some work 
in the opposite way, the latter affecting people living in the world, 
the former assailing those living the monastic life and, hence, lacking 
stimulus from the outside. All I can say here about it is that if you 
look for wisdom among evil men, you most certainly will not find it 
(cf. Prov. 14:6). 

After we have fought long and hard against this demon, this ally 
of the flesh, after we have driven it out of our heart, torturing it with 
the stone of fasting and the sword of humility, this scourge goes into 
hiding in our bodies, like some kind of worm, and it tries to pollute 
us, stimulating us to irrational and untimely movements. This partic- 
ularly happens to those who have fallen to the demon of vainglory, 
for since dirty thoughts no longer preoccupy their hearts they fall 
victim to pride. Such people can discover whether or not this is true 
if once they have attained a certain stillness they quietly take stock of 
themselves. F{)r they will then discover that deep down in iheir 
hearts, like a snake in dung, is the notion that by their uwn cHiiriN 
and enthusiasm they made great advances in purity, Poor wrcK hrs' 



7.t,i. See St, M.irk the ,\vceiic, On the S[iintual I mo, 4 12*1 (/''- 6S, >)m.. I 1 I'M, | 
119, p. 1 IH). 



IKI 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



They forget the saying: "What have you got that you did not receive 
as a gift either from God or as a result of the help and prayers of oth- 
ers?" (cf. 1 Cor. 4:7). Let them beware then. Let them with all zeal 
eject from their hearts the snake mentioned above. Let them kill it 
with great humility, so that when they have got rid of it they may be 
stripped of their garments of skin'"* and sing, like pure children, a tri- 
umphant hymn of chastity to the Lord. Only let us hope that when 
they are thus stripped, they may not find that they are bereft of the 
humility and freedom from malice so natural to children. 

This demon is especially on the lookout for our weak moments 
and will viciously assail us when we are physically unable to pray 
against it. 

The effort of bodily prayer can help those not yet granted real 
prayer of the heart. 1 am referring to the stretching out of the hands, 
the beating of the breast, the sincere raising of the eyes heavenward, 
deep sighs and constant prostrations, But this is not always feasible 
when other people are present, and this is when the demons particu- 
larly like to launch an attack and, because we have not yet the 
strength of mind to stand up against them and because the hidden 
power of prayer is not yet within us, we succumb. So go somewhere 
apart, if you can. Hide for a while in some secret place. If you can, lift 
up the eyes of your soul, but if not, the eyes of your body. Stand still 
with your arms in the shape of the cross so that with this sign you 
may shame and conquer your Amalek.'^^ Cry out to God, Who has the 
strength to save you. Do not bother with elegant and clever words. 
Just speak humbly, beginning with, "Have mercy on me, for I am 
weak" (Ps. 6:}). And then you will come to experience the power of 
the Most High and with help from heaven you will drive off your in- 
visible foes. The man who gets into the habit of waging war in this 
way will soon put his enemies to flight solely by means of spiritual 
resources, for this is the reward God likes to bestow on those who put 
up a- good struggle, and rightly so. 



74. The "garments of skin" allude to Gen, i:2 1 and represent that which was add- 
ed to human nature as a result of the fall, i.e., the passions, sexual stirrings and mortal- 
ity. For a discussion of the patristic use of this expression see Gregory of Nyssa, I'hr 
Life of Moses, F.'V Malherbe and Ferguson (The Classics of Western Spirituality), pp. 160-!, 
note 29. 

75. Like Moses with his arms raised in the battle with the Amalekites (cf. Exod. 
17:11). 



184 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



I was once at a gathering of holy men and I noticed a zealous 
brother troubled by evil thoughts. There was no place where he could 
go aside for secret prayer, and so he went out, as if on a call of nature. 
There he armed himself with intense prayer against the enemy. 1 
criticized him for having gone to an inappropriate place, but the an- 
swer he gave me was this: "I chose an unclean place in which to pray 
to be cleansed from filth, that I might drive out unclean thoughts." 

All demons try to darken our minds so that they may then sug- 
gest to us what they want us to do, and so long as the mind stays 
awake we will not be robbed of our treasure. But the demon of forni- 
cation tries harder than all the others. First, by darkening our minds, 
which guide us, it urges and inclines us in the presence of other peo- 
ple to do things that only the mad would think of. Then when our 
minds are cleared we become ashamed of these unholy deeds, words, 
and gestures, not only before those who saw us but before ourselves, 
and we are astounded by this earlier blindness of ours. The result is 
that frequently as a consequence of realizing what had happened, 
men turn away from this particular evil. , 

Drive out that enemy which, after you have sinned, comes be- 
tween you and your prayers, meditation, and vigil. Remember the 
saying; "Because the soul tormented by earlier sin is a burden to me, I 
will save it from its enemies" (cf. Luke 18:5), 

Who has won the battle over the body? The man who is contrite 
of heart. And who is contrite of heart? The man who has denied him- 
self, for how can he fail to be contrite of heart if he has died to his 
own will? 

There is a kind of passionate person, more passionate than most, 
who confesses his defilements with pleasure and delight. 

Dirty, shameful thoughts in the heart are usually caused by the 
deceiver of the heart, the demon of fornication, and only restraint and 
indeed a disregard for them will prove an antidote. 

By what rule or manner can I bind this body of mine? By what 
precedent can I judge him? Before I can bind him he is let loose, be- 
fore I can condemn him I am reconciled to him, before I can punish 
him I bow down to him and feel sorry for him. How can I .ale him 
when my nature disposes me to love him? How can I break away 
from him when I am bound to him forever? How can 1 escape troni 
him when he is going to rise with mc? How can 1 make him intiirrii|il 
when he has received a corruptible nature? Mow can I niyur wilh 
him when all the arguments of nature are on hi.s side? v 



IH5 



JOHN CIJMACUS 



If I try to bind him through lasiing, then I am passing judgment 
on my neighbor who does not last — with the result that I am handed 
over to him again. If I defeat him by not passing judgment I turn 
proud — and I am in thrall to him once more. I ie is my helper and my 
enemy, my assistant and my opponent, a protector and a traitor. I am 
kind to him and he assaults me. If 1 wear him out he gets weak. If he 
has a rest he becomes unruly. If I upset him''' he cannot stand it. If I 
mortify him I endanger myself If I strike him down I have nothing 
left by which to acquire virtues. I embrace him. And I turn away 
from him. 

What is this mystery in me? What is the principle of this mixture 
of body and soul? How can I be my own friend and my own enemy? 
Speak to me! Speak to me, my yoke-fellow, my nature! I cannot ask 
anyone else about you. How can 1 remain uninjured by you? How 
can I escape the danger of my own nature? I have made a promise to 
Christ that I will fight you, yet how can I defeat your tyranny? But 
this I have resolved, namely, that I am going to master you. 

And this is what the flesh might say in reply: "I will never tell 
you what you do not already know. I will speak the knowledge we 
both have. Within me is my begetter, the love of self The fire that 
comes to me from outside is too much pampering and care. The fire 
within me is past ease and things long done. I conceived and give 
birth to sins, and they when born beget death by despair in their 
turn. And yet if you have learned the sure and rooted weakness with- 
in both you and me, you have manacled my hands. If you starve your 
longings, you have bound my feet, and they can travel no further. If 
you have taken up the yoke of obedience, you have cast my yoke 
aside. If you have taken possession of humility, you have cut off my 

head." 

This is the fifteenth reward of victory. He who has earned it 
while still alive has died and been resurrected. From now on he has a 
taste of the immortality to come. 



76. Gk sainomenos. HTM reads stainomenos, "if 1 turn away in [(wthtiig.' 



186 



Step 16 



ON AVARICE 



As most of the experts reckon the matter, the demon of avarice, 
that spirit of countless heads, comes next after the tyrant described 
above, and who am I to run counter to the sequence which these 
learned men suggest? Hence I follow the same practice, and after a 
few words on the disease would like to talk briefly about the remedy. 

Avarice is a worship of idols and is the offspring of unbelief It 
makes excuses for infirmity and is the mouthpiece of old age. It is the 
prophet of hunger, and the herald of drought. 

The miser sneers at the gospel and is a deliberate transgressor. 
The man of charity spreads his money about him, but the man who 
claims to possess both charity and money is a self-deceived fool. The 
man who mourns for himself has renounced even his body and does 
not spare it in due season. 

Do not say that you are interested in money for the sake of the 
poor, for two mites were insufficient to purchase the kingdom (cf 
Luke 21:2). 

A generous man met a miser, and the miser said the other man 
was without discernment. 

The man who has conquered this vice has cut out care, but tlu' 
man trapped by it can never pray freely to God. 

The prcifxt of almsgiving is the start of avarice, and the finidh In 
detestation of the poor. The collector is stirred by charity, Iml, whm 
the money is in, the gri]> tiglitcns. 



187 



JOHN CMMACUS 



I have seen the poverty-stricken grow rich and forget their want, 
through living with the poor in spirit. 

The monk who is greedy for money is a stranger to tedium of the 
spirit. Always he turns over within himself the words of the Apostle: 
"The man who does not work does not cat" (2 Thess. 3:10) and, 
"These hands of mine have served me and those who were with me" 
(Acts 20:34). 

Such then is the sixteenth contest, and the man who has tri- 
umphed in it has either won love or cut out care. 



188 



Step 17 



ON POVERTY 



The poverty of a monk is resignation froln care. It is life without 
anxiety and travels light, far from sorrow and faithful to the com- 
mandments. The poor monk is lord of the world. He has handed all 
his cares over to God, and by his faith has obtained ail men as his ser- 
vants. If he lacks something he does not complain to his fellows and 
he accepts what comes his way as if from the hand of the Lord. In his 
poverty he turns into a son of detachment and he sets no value on 
what he has. Having withdrawn from the world, he comes to regard 
everything as refuse. Indeed he is not genuinely poor if he starts to 
worry about something. 

A man who has embraced poverty offers up prayer that is pure, 
while a man who loves possessions prays to material images. 

Those living in obedience to another are free of all cupidity, for 
when the body has been given up, what else is there to call one's own? 
The only way they can be harmed is by readily and easily moving 
from place to place. I have seen monks content to remain in one local- 
ity on account of material possessions, but my praise is for those who 
are pilgrims for the Lord. 

The man who has tasted the things of heaven easily think.s noih- 
ing of what is below, but he who has had no taste of heaven {\\n\n 
pleasure in possessions, 

A man who is poor for no good reason falls into ,\ ilmtbir iiiiNfof 



m 



JOHN CLIMACUS 

tune. He goes without present goods and is deprived of these in the 

future. 

We monks should be careful not to be less trusting than the 
birds, which are not anxious and do not gather into barns (cf. Matt. 

6:26). 

The man who gives up possessions for religious motives is great, 
but the man who renounces his will is holy indeed. The one will earn 
money or grace a hundred times over, but the other will inherit eter- 
nal life. 

Waves never leave the sea. Anger and gloom never leave the mi- 
serly. 

The man who thinks nothing of goods has freed himself from 
quarrels and disputes. But the lover of possessions will fight to the 
death for a needle. Sturdy faith cuts off cares, and remembrance of 
death denies the body. There was no trace of avarice in Job, and so he 
remained tranquil when he lost everything. 

Avarice is said to be the root of all evil {1 Tim. 6:10), and it is so 
because it causes hatred, theft, envy, separations, hostility, stormy 
blasts, remembrance of past wrongs, inhuman acts and even murder. 
A smalt fire can burn down an entire forest. But one virtue can 
help many to escape all the vices mentioned above. That virtue is de- 
tachment, which is a withdrawal from all evil desires, and which 
grows from an experience and taste of the knowledge of God and 
from a meditation on the account to be rendered at death. 

The careful reader will recall the story of the mother of every 
evil.^*" Listing her wicked and accursed offspring, she named the 
stone of insensitivity as her second child. The many-headed serpent 
of idolatry prevented me from giving it its own due place. The dis- 
cerning Fathers, for reasons unknown to me, give it third place in the 
chain of eight capital sins. 

I have said enough about avarice, and I plan to say something 
about insensitivity as the third infirmity, despite being born second. 
Then I will go on to discuss sleep, keeping vigil, as well as childish 
cowardly fear, all failings of beginners. 

This is the seventeenth step. He who has climbed it is traveling 
to heaven unburdened by material things. 



76a. See 14 (869D), p. 17(1. 



191) 



Step 18 



ON INSENSITIVITY 



Insensitivity is deadened feeling in body and spirit, and comes 
from long sickness and carelessness. Lack of awareness is negligence 
that has become habit. It is thought gone numb, an offspring of pre- 
disposition, a trap for zeal, a noose for courage, an ignorance of com- 
punction, the gateway to despair, the mother of forgetfulness giving 
birth to loss of fear of God and, in turn, to a deadened spirit, like a 
daughter bearing her own mother. 

The insensitive man is a foolish philosopher, an exegete con- 
demned by his own words, a scholar who contradicts himself, a blind 
man teaching sight to others. He talks about healing a wound and 
does not stop making it worse. He complains about what has hap- 
pened and does not stop eating what is harmful. He prays against it 
but carries on as before, doing it and being angry with himself. And 
the wretched man is in no way shamed by his own words. "I'm doing 
wrong," he cries, and zealously continues to do so. His lips pray 
against it and his body struggles for it. He talks profoundly about 
death and acts as if he will never die. He groans over the separation of 
soul and body, and yet lives in a state of somnolence as if he were 
eternal. He has plenty to say about self-control and fights for a gour- 
met life, lie reads about the judgment and begins nt smile, uliout 
vainglory and is vainglorious while he is reading, lie recites wlijl hr 
has learnt about keeping vigil, and at once drojTs off lo s\rv\i I'l iiyrr 
he evtols, and runs Irnm il as il frnm a plague. Hlcssing*) hr ^hnurrN 



191 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



on obedience, and is the first to disobey. Detachment he praises, and 
he shamelessly fights over a rag. When he is angry he gets bitter, and 
then his bitterness makes him angry, so that having suffered one de- 
feat he fails to notice that he has suffered another. He gorges himself, 
is sorry, and a little later is at it again. He blesses silence and cannot 
stop talking about it. He teaches meekness and frequently gets angry 
while he is teaching it. Having come to his senses, he sighs and shak- 
ing his head embraces his passion once more. He denounces laughter, 
and while lecturing on mourning he is all smiles. In front of others he 
criticizes himself for being vainglorious, and in making the admission 
he is looking for glory. He looks people in the eye with passion and 
talks about chastity. Out in the world he is full of praise for the soli- 
tary life and cannot see how much he is disgracing himself. He glori- 
fies almsgivers and despises the poor. In everything he shows himself 
up for what he is, and does not come to his senses, though I would not 
say he was incapable of doing so. 

I have seen such men weep as they hear of death and the dread 
judgment, and with the tears still in their eyes they rush off to din- 
ner. And it amazed me to see how this stinking tyrant by means of 
complete insensitivity could even manage to overpower mourning. 

I have described, as much as my poor talents permit, the wiles 
and the havoc wrought by this stony, stubborn, raging, ignorant pas- 
sion, and I refuse to dwell on it. If there is anyone with the God-given 
skill to heal the sores, let him not shrink from the task. I am not 
ashamed to admit that my powers fail here, for I am very sorely tried 
by this vice and I would not h^ve been able alone to analyze its wily 
ways if I had not laid hold of it, gripping it hard, examining it to dis- 
cover what has been described above, scourging it with fear of the 
Lord and endless prayer. That is why this tyrannical evildoer said 
this to me: "Those who are under my sway laugh when they see the 
bodies of the dead. At prayer they are stony, hard, and blinded. In 
front of the altar they feel nothing. They receive the Holy Gift as if it 
were ordinary bread. And I laugh at people when I see them stirred 
by compunction. My father taught me to kill everything born of cour- 
age and love. I am the mother of Laughter, the nurse of Sleep, the 
friend of the Full Stomach. When I am found out 1 do not grieve, and 
I am the ally of Fake Piety." 

Amazed by the words of this demented fury, I asked, in my as- 
tonishment, for the name of her father. "I was not born of just one 
parent," she said, 'i am of mixed and uncertain origin. Big meals 



192 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



keep me going, time adds to my stature and bad habit fixes me in such 
a way that he who possesses me will never be rid of me. But if you arc 
always on the watch and think of eternal judgment, maybe I shall let 
go of you to some extent. If you discover why I came to be within 
you, it will be possible for you to do battle with my mother, since she 
is not the same for all. Pray often where the dead are laid out and 
paint in your heart an indelible image of them, traced there with the 
brush of fasting. For otherwise you will never defeat me." 



193 



Step 19 



ON SLEEP, PRAYER 

AND THE SINGING 

IN CHURCH OF PSALMS 



Sleep is a natural state. It is also an image of death and a respite 
of the senses. Sleep is one, but like desire it has many sources. That is 
to say, it comes from nature, from food, from demons, or perhaps in 
some degree even from prolonged fasting by which the weakened 
flesh is moved to long for repose. 

Just as too much drinking comes from habit, so too from habit 
comes overindulgence in sleep. For this reason one has to struggle 
against it especially at the start of one's religious life, because a long- 
standing habit is very difficult to correct. 

Let us observe and we shall find that the spiritual trumpet^' that 
summons the brethren together visibly is also the signal for the invisi- 
ble assembly of our foes. Some stand by our bed and encourage us to 
lie down again after we have got up. "Wait until the first hymns are 
over," they say. "Then it will be time enough to go to church." Oth- 
ers get those at prayer to fall asleep. Still others cause bad and unusu- 
al stomachache, while others encourage prattle in the church. Some 



77. The usual means of summoning monks to prayer was by a wooden gong or 
plank known later as the talanton. Jerome, however, says that Pachomian monks wert' 
summoned by the sound of a trumpet (PI- 23, 69B). 



194 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN I 



inspire bad thoughts, others get us to lean against the wall as though 
we were weary or to start yawning over and over again, while still 
others cause us to laugh during prayer so as to provoke the anger of 
God against us. Some get us in our laziness to hurry up with the sing- 
ing, while others suggest we should sing slowly in order that we may 
take pleasure in it. Others, by sitting on our mouths, shut them so 
that we can scarcely open them. 

However, the man who considers with sensitivity of heart that 
he is standing before God will be an immovable pillar in prayer, and 
none of the demons mentioned above will delude him. 

The truly obedient monk often becomes suddenly radiant and ex- 
ultant during his prayers. He is like a wrestler who was earlier 
trained and made eager for his enterprise. 

Everyone can pray in a crowd. For some it is a good thing to 
pray with a single kindred soul. But solitary prayer is only for the 
very few. 

When chanting hymns with others it may be impos.sible to pray 
with the wordless prayer of the spirit. But jtour mind should meditate 
on the words being chanted or read. Or else you should have a set 
prayer to say while you are waiting for the alternate verse of the 
chant. But no one should undertake any additional task, or rather, dis- 
traction, during the time of prayer. This is something that Antony 
the Great learned clearly from his attendant angel.''" 

A furnace tests gold. Prayer tests the zeal of a monk and his love 
for God. 

To draw close to God, to drive out the demons — there is a task to 
be praised! 



77ii. Tht Suyitigs itl tlv llfieit t'alhrti, Aiiiiiny I. 



I'M 



Step 20 



ON ALERTNESS 



Some stand weaponless and without armor before the kings of 
earth, while others hold insignia of office, shields, and swords. The 
former are vastly superior to the latter since they are regularly the 
personal relations of the king and members of the royal household. 

Let us see now what happens when we stand in prayer during 
the evening or throughout the day and night before God our King. 
Some keep nightlong vigil, their hands raised in prayer like spirits 
free of every burden. Others sing the psalms or read, while some, out 
of weakness, bravely fight sleep by working with their hands. Others 
think constantly of death and try in this way to obtain a contrite 
heart. Of all these types, the first and last persevere in nightlong vigil 
out of love for God, the second do what is appropriate for a monk, 
and the third travel the lowliest road. Still, God accepts and judges 
the offerings of each type in accordance with their intentions and 
their abilities. 

Alertness keeps the mind clean. Somnolence binds the soul. The 
alert monk does battle with fornication, but the sleepy one goes to 
live with it. Alertness is a quenching of lust, deliverance from fanta- 
sies in dreams, a tearful eye, a heart made soft and gentle, thoughts 
restrained, food digested, passions tamed, spirits subdued, tongue 
controlled, idle imaginings banished. 

The vigilant monk is a fisher of thoughts, and in the quiet of the 
night he can easily observe and catch them. 



196 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



The bell rings for prayer. The monk who loves God says, "Bra- 
vo! Bravo!" The lazy monk says, "Alas! Alas!" 

Mealtime reveals the gluttonous, prayer time the lovers of God. 
The former dance and the latter frown when the table is made ready. 

Long sleep produces forgetfulness, but keeping vigil clears the 
memory. 

The farmer collects his wealth on the threshing floor and in the 
winepress. Monks collect their wealth and knowledge during the 
hours of evening and night when they are standing at prayer and con- 
templation. 

Excessive sleep is a bad companion, stealing half a lifetime or 
more from the lazy man. 

The inexperienced monk is wide awake when talking to his 
friends but half asleep at prayer time. The lazy monk is a great talker 
whose eyes begin to shut when the sacred reading is started. When 
the trumpet sounds the dead will rise, and when idle talk begins the 
dozing wake. 

The tyrant sleep is a cunning fiend who slips away from us when 
our stomachs are full and attacks strongly when we are hungry and 
thirsty. It proposes that we do manual work at prayer time, for in no 
other way can it interfere with the prayers of those who are keeping 
watch. Its first step is to attack beginners, trying to make them care- 
less from their first day. Or it strives to prepare the way for the de- 
mon of fornication. Hence until we conquer it we ought never seek to 
be absent from common prayer, since shame at least may keep us 
from dozing off. 

The demon of vainglory is the enemy of sleep, just as the hound 
is the enemy of hares. 

At day's end the merchant counts his profits, and the monk does 
the same when psalmody is over. 

When prayer is over, wait quietly and you will observe how 
mobs of demons, as though challenged by us, will try to attack us 
after prayer by means of wild fantasies. Watch carefully and you will 
note those that are accustomed to snatch away the first fruits of the 
soul. 

It can happen that our meditation on the psalms may persi.st even 
into our time of sleeping. This can sometimes be caused by demons in 
order lo lead us lo vainglory I would not have menliniicd (liis Ihid I 
not bccri compelled tn do .s<i Hut mi fad the sou! ciulli'ssly (hi-imiu 
pied by day with (he word of (Jod will love to be prcocctipictl by il In 



vn 



JOHN (;i,iMACUS 



sleep too. This second grace is properly a reward for the first and will 
help us to avoid spirits'^ and fantasies. 

Such then is the twentieth step, He who has climbed it has re- 
ceived light in his heart. 



78. Gk pnevmaton. HTM rea.ds ptomaton, "falls.' 



198 



Step 21 



ON UNMANLY FEARS 



If you pursue virtue in a monastery or in gatherings of holy men, 
you are unlikely to be attacked by cowardice. But if you pass your 
time in solitary abodes, you must strive not to be mastered by cow- 
ardice, the child of vainglory, the daughter of unbelief. 

Cowardice is childish behavior within a soul advanced in years 
and vainglory. It is a lapse from faith that comes from anticipating 
the unexpected. 

Fear is danger tasted in advance, a quiver as the heart takes fright 
before unnamed calamity. Fear is a loss of assurance. 

A proud soul is the slave of cowardice. Trusting only itself, it is 
frightened by a sound or a shadow. 

Those who mourn and those who are insensitive suffer no cow- 
ardice, but the fearful and the frightened often collapse and their 
minds are unhinged. Nor is this unreasonable. For the Lord rightly 
withdraws His protection from the proud so that the rest of us may 
not become vain. 

While cowards are vainglorious, not everyone who is free from 
fear is also humble. I'hieves and grave robbers may be uniroubUul by 
fear. 

Do not hesitate to go in the dark of the night lo ihnsc pliiiCK 
where you arc normnlly frighlencd. The sliglucsi conicsMnii in iIiIm 
weakness means iluit tlii.s ttiildi.sh ami absurd iii;il;uly uitl giuw old 



\W 



JOHNCLIMACUS 



with you. So as you go u lu-rc Iright will lay hold of you, put on the 

armor of prayer, atui wluii y r;uh i he spot, stretch out your hands 

and flog your encniit-s with iIk- n.imt. „f Jesus, since there is no 
stronger weapon in heaven .)r on t-anh. And when you drive the fear 
away, give praise to the (Jod Who lias delivered you, and He will pro- 
tect you for all eternity, provided you remain grateful. Just as one 
morsel will not fill your stomach, so you will not defeat fear in one 
move. It will fade in proportion to your mourning and the less we 
mourn the greater will be our cowardice. 

"My hair and my flesh shuddered" (Job 4:15). These were the 
words of Eliphaz when he was talking about the cunning of this de- 
mon. Fear starts sometimes in the soul, sometimes in the body, and 
the one communicates the weakness to the other. But if your soul is 
unafraid even when the body is terrified, you are close to being 
healed. '« However, it is barrenness of soul, not the darkness or the 
emptiness of places, which gives the demons power against us. And 
the providence of God sometimes allows this to happen so that we 
may learn from it. 

The servant of the Lord will be afraid only of his Master, while 
the man who does not yet fear Him is often scared by his own shad- 
ow. The body is terrified by the presence of an invisible spirit. Yet 
when an angel stands nearby, the soul of the humble is exultant. So if 
we detect an angel by the effect he is producing, let us hasten to pray 
since our heavenly guardian has come to join us.^° 



79. H'l M adds: "But actual freedom from cowardice comes when we eagerly ac- 
cept all unexpected events with a contrite heart." 

80. HTM adds; "He who has conquered cowardice has clearly dedicated liis l,fV 
and soul to God." 



200 



Step 22 



ON VAINGLORY 



Some would hold that vainglory i^ to be distinguished from 
pride, and so they give it a special place and chapter. Hence their 
claim that there are eight deadly sins. But against this is the view of 
(iregory the Theologian^' and other teachers that in fact the number 
is seven. I also hold this view. After all, what pride remains in a man 
who has conquered vainglory? The difference is between a child and 
■A man, between wheat and bread, for the first is a beginning and the 
second an end. Therefore, as the occasion demands, let us talk about 
I he unholy vice of self-esteem, the beginning and completion of the 
passions; and let us talk briefly, for to undertake an exhaustive discus- 
sion would be to act like someone who inquires into the weight of the 
winds. 

V rotn the point of view of form, vainglory is a change of nature, a 
perversi<m of character, a taking note of criticism.^'^ As for its quali- 
ty, it is a waste of work and sweat, a betrayal of treasure, an offspring 



HI In fflct (irejfory the CJrcat. The eight principal templaiinnri of l';vii«rMi< w»rf 
jjlllHotiy, lust, avarice, Je|ectii)n, anger, despondency ('accidie"), viiin([l(irv tiiiil )iritl(> 

CDMfiitin inlriKluccd lln.s list to the West. Pi.pe (Jreyorv the (irem rcdiucd llii- t Iirt 

lo nrvrti l>\ jmalnarnalinj! vainglory wilh pride and dejection « nh d«<«|Hiuil«in'>' itnil 
In inliodui lll^ cnvv (■( llic frerace, p. ftl 

Hlii I he M'tlw is iiol clear One vtonid e<perl (he opjioMtr In l>,itrtltHlil, Y\t. "• W- 
Jumt III lalir n.itr o( cnneism," at in ijic I, nun traiislalnin l/'(r MM, 'iy\\\i 



20 1 



|()IIN CMMACUS 



of unbelief, a harhinger of pride, shipwreck in port, the ant on the 
threshing floor, small and y<'i wiih designs on all the fruit of one's 
labor. The ant waits until the wheat is in, vainglory until the riches of 
excellence are gathered; the one a thief, the other a wastrel. 

The spirit of despair exults at the sight of mounting vice, the 
spirit of vainglory at the sight of the growing treasures of virtue. The 
door for the one is a mass of wounds, while the gateway for the other 
is the wealth of hard work done. 

Watch vainglory. Notice how, until the very day of the burial it 
rejoices in clothes, oils, servants, perfumes, and such like. 

Like the sun which shines on all alike, vainglory beams on every 
occupation. What I mean is this. I fast, and turn vainglorious. I stop 
fasting so that I will draw no attention to myself, and I become vain- 
glorious over my prudence. I dress well or badly, and am vainglorious 
in either case. I talk or I hold my peace, and each time I am defeated. 
No matter how I shed this prickly thing, a spike remains to stand up 
against me. 

A vainglorious man is a believer — and an idolater. Apparently 
honoring God, he actually is out to please not God but men. To be a 
showoff is to be vainglorious, and the fast of such a man is unreward- 
ed and his prayer futile, since he is practicing both to win praise. A 
vainglorious ascetic doubly cheats himself, wearying his body and 
getting no reward. Who would not laugh at this vainglorious worker, 
standing for the psalms and moved by vainglory sometimes to laugh- 
ter and sometimes to tears for all to see? 

I he Lord frequently hides from us even the perfections we have 
obtained. But the man who praises us, or, rather, who misleads us, 
opens our eyes with his words and once our eyes are opened our trea- 
sures vanish. 

The flatterer is a servant of the devils, a teacher of pride, the de- 
stroyer of contrition, a vandal of excellence, a perverse guide. The 
prophet says this; "Those who honor you deceive you" (Isa. 3:12). 

Men of high spirit endure offense nobly and willingly. But only 
the holy and the saintly can pass unscathed through praise. And I 
have seen men in mourning who, on being praised, reared up in an- 
ger, one passion giving way to another as at some public meeting. 

"No one knows the thoughts of a man except the spirit within 
him" (1 Cor. 2:11). Hence those who want to praise us to our face 
should be ashamed and silent. 

When you hear that your neighbor or your friend has denounced 



202 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCKN I 



you behind your back or indeed in your presence, show hint Imr und 
try to compliment him. 

It is a great achievement to shrug the praise of men off one's soul 
Greater still is to reject the praise of demons. 

It is not the self-critical who reveals his humility (for does not ev- 
eryone have somehow to put up with himself?). Rather it is the m.m 
who continues to love the person who has criticized him. 

I have seen the demon of vainglory suggesting thoughts to one 
brother, revealing them to another, and getting the second man to tell 
the first what he is thinking and then praising him for his ability to 
read minds. And that dreadful demon has even lighted on parts of the 
body, shaking and stirring them. 

Ignore him when he tells you to accept the office of bishop or ab- 
bot or teacher. It is hard to drive a dog from a butcher's counter. 

When he notices that someone has achieved a measure of interior 
calm, he immediately suggests to him the need to return from the des- 
ert to the world, in order to save those who are perishing. 

Ethiopians have one kind of appearance, statues another. So too 
is it the case that the vainglory of those living in community is differ- 
ent from that which obtains in the desert. 

Vainglory anticipates the arrival of guests from the outside 
world. It prompts the more frivolous monk to rush out to meet them, 
to fall at their feet, to give the appearance of humility, when in fact he 
is full of pride. It makes him look and sound modest and directs his 
eye to the visitors' hands in the hope of getting something from them. 
It induces him to address them as "lords and patrons, graced with 
godly life." At table it makes him urge abstinence on someone else 
and fiercely criticize subordinates. It enables those who are standing 
in a slovenly manner during the singing of psalms to make an effort, 
tho.se who have no voice to sing well, and those who are sleepy to 
wake up. It flatters the precentor, seeks the first place in the choir, 
and addres.scs him as father and master while the visitors are still 
there. 

X'aingiory induces pride in the favored and resentment in those 
who are slighted. Often it causes dishonor instead of honor, bcciiust- it 
brings great shame to its angry disciples. It makes the tjuick tiMiipcml 
look mild before men. It thrives amid talent and freipietiily Ihiiijj^ I'u 
(astrophc on those enslaved to it. 

I hnvc seen a demon harm and rha.se away his own Itnittiri S'lui- 
tors Inuii till- outside world came just al a monu iit wlirii it l»tiilh«r 



iUi 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



got angry and the wretched man gave himself over to vainglory. He 
was unable to serve two passions at the one time. 

The servant of vainglory leads a double life. To outward appear- 
ance, he lives with monks; bin in his heart of hearts he is in the world. 
If we really long for heavenly things, we will surely taste the glo- 
ry above. And whoever has tasted that will think nothing of earthly 
glory. For it would surprise me if .someone could hold the latter in 
contempt unless he had tasted the former. 

It often happens that having been left naked by vainglory, we 
turn around and strip it ourselves more cleverly. For I have encoun- 
tered some who embarked on the spiritual life out of vainglory, mak- 
ing therefore a bad start, and yet they finished up in a most admirable 
way because they changed their intentions. 

A man who takes pride in natural abilities — I mean cleverness, 
the ability to learn, skill in reading, good diction, quick grasp, and ail 
such skills as we possess without having to work for them — this man, 
I say, will never receive the blessings of heaven, since the man who is 
unfaithful in little is unfaithful and vainglorious in much. And there 
are men who wear out their bodies to no purpose in the pursuit of 
total dispa.ssion, heavenly treasures, miracle working, and prophetic 
ability, and the poor fools do not realize that humility, not hard work, 
is the mother of such things. The man who seeks a quid pro quo from 
God builds on uncertainty, whereas the man who considers himself a 
debtor will receive sudden and unexpected riches. 

When the winnower^^ tells you to show off your virtues for the 
benefit of an audience, do not yield to him. "What shall it profit a 
man to gain the whole world and destroy himself?" (Matt. 16:26). 

Our neighbor is moved by nothing so much as by a sincere and 
humble way of talking and of behaving. It is an example and a spur to 
others never to turn proud. And there is nothing to equal the benefit 
of this. 

A man of insight told me this: "I was once sitting at an assem- 
bly," he said. "The demon of vainglory and the demon of pride came 
to sit on either side of me. One poked me with the finger of vainglory 
and encouraged me to talk publicly about some vision or labor of 
mine in the desert. I shook him off with the words: 'Let those who 
wish me harm be driven back and let them blush' (Ps. .?9:15). Then 
the demon on my left at once said in my ear: 'Well done! Well done! 



82, I.e., the devil. 



204 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



You have become great by conquering my shameless mother.' Turn- 
ing to him 1 answered appropriately, making use of the rest of the 
verse: 'Defeat and shame on all who say, "Well done! Well done!" ' " 
And how is it, I asked him, that vainglory is the mother of pride. His 
answer was this: "Praise exalts and puffs me up, and when the soul is 
exalted, pride lifts it up as high as heaven — and then throws it down 
into the abyss." 

But there is a glory that comes from the Lord. "1 will glorify 
those who glorify Me," He says (1 Kings [1 Sam.] 2:30). And there is a 
glory that follows it which is contrived by the demons, for it is said, 
"Woe to you when all men shall speak well of you" (Luke 6:26). You 
can recognize the first kind of glory when you look on it as dangerous 
and run from it in every possible way, hiding your life-style wherever 
you are. And you may be certain of the other sort when you find 
yourself doing something, however small, with the hope that men 
may notice you. 

Dread vainglory urges us to pretend that we have some virtue 
which does not belong to us. It encourages us with the text: "Let your 
light so shine before men that they will see your good deeds" (Matt. 
5:16), 

The Lord often humbles the vainglorious by causing some dis- 
honor to befall them. And indeed the first step in overcoming vain- 
glory is to remain silent and to accept dishonor gladly. The middle 
stage is to check every act of vainglory while it is still in thought. The 
end — insofar as one may talk of an end to an abyss — is to be able to 
Hcccpt humiliation before others without actually feeling it. 

Do not conceal your sin because of the idea that you must not 
Rcandali/e your neighbor. Of course this injunction must not be ad- 
IutihI to blindly. It will depend on the nature of one's sinfulness. 

If ever we seek glory, if it comes our way uninvited, or if we plan 
dome course of action because of our vainglory, we should think of 
our mourning and of the bles.sed fear on us as we stood alone in 
prayer l)eforc Ciod, If we do this we will assuredly outflank shameless 
vuinglory, that is if our wish for true prayer is genuine. This may be 
ihsiilluietn. In which case let us briefly remember that we nuisi die. 
Should tliis also prove ineffective, let us at least go in friir o( ihi' 
uluiitie thill always comes after honor, for assuredly lie wht» fXiiIlM 
hini'.cli will be hnnibk-d not only there but here also. 

When those who praise us, or, rather, liiose who Irtiil iim iiKlrtty, 
begin to cxrtit ti.s, we should briefly remember the nitiliiliiilr (if iiiir 



205 



JOIINCMMACUS 



sins and in this way wc u ill discover that we do not deserve whatever 
is said or done in our honor. 

Some of the prayers <tl the vainj^lurious no doubt deserve to win 
the attention of God, but He regularly anticipates their wishes and 
petitions so that their pride may not be increased by the success of 
their prayers. 

Simpler people do not usually succumb to the poison of vainglo- 
ry, which is, after all, a loss of simplicity and a hypocritical mode of 
behavior. 

A worm, fully grown, often sprouts wings and can fly up high. 
Vainglory, fully grown, can give birth to pride, which is the begin- 
ning and the end of all evil. 

Anyone free of this sickness is close to salvation. Anyone affected 
by it is far removed from the glory of the saints. 

Such, then, is the twenty-second step. The man untouched by 
vainglory will not tumble into that senseless pride which is so detest- 
able to God. 



206 



Step 23 



ON PRIDE 



Pride is a denial of God, an invention of the devil, contempt for 
men. It is the mother of condemnation, the offspring of praise, a sign 
of barrenness. It is a flight from God's help, the harbinger of mad- 
ness, the author of downfall. It is the cause of diabolical possession, 
the source of anger, the gateway of hypocrisy. It is the fortress of de- 
mons, the custodian of sins, the source of hardheartedness. It is the 
denial of compassion, a bitter pharisee, a cruel judge. It is the foe of 
God, Ii is the root of blasphemy. 

Pride begins where vainglory leaves off Its midpoint comes with 
the humiliation of our neighbor, the shameless parading of our 
iicliicvcmcnts, complacency, and unwillingness to be found out. It 
ends with the spurning of God's help, the exalting of one's own ef- 
forts and a devilish disposition. 

Listen, therefore, all who wish to avoid this pit. This passion of- 
ten draws strength initially from the giving of thanks, and at first ii 
(jocN not sliitmelessly urge us to renounce God. I have seen people 
w ho .s[)ei>k aloud their thanks to (lod but who in their heart", arc glo- 
rifyiiig themselves, .something demonstrated by that Pharisee with hi* 
"()<;. hI, I ihank Vou"(l,uke 1H:11). 

I'ridc lakes tif> residence wherever wc liavc lapsed, toi ii ItipNC In 
Ml bid tin indicniion of pride. And an adniirabK m;iii suit! niicp tii m»i 



107 



JOHN CIJMACUS 



"Think of a dozen shameful passions. Love one of them, I mean pride, 
and it will take up the spate of all the other eleven. "*2a 

A proud monk argues hitu-rly with others. The humble monk is 
loath to contradict them. 

The cypress tree does not bend to the ground in order to walk, 
nor does the haughty monk in order to yaiii obedience. 

The proud man wants to be in charge of things. He would feel 
lost otherwise. 

"God resists the proud" (James 4:6). Who then could have mercy 
on them? Before God every proud man is unclean and who then 
could purify such a person? 

For the proud correction is a fall, a thorn (cf. 2 Cor. 12:7) is a dev- 
il, and abandonment by God is madness. Whereas in the first two in- 
stances there are human cures available, this last cannot be healed by 
man. 

To reject criticism is to show pride, while to accept it is to show 
oneself free of this fetter. 

Pride and nothing else caused an angel to fall from heaven. And 
so one may reasonably ask whether one may reach heaven by humil- 
ity alone without the help of any other virtue. 

Pride loses the profits of all hard work and sweat. They clam- 
ored, but there was none to save them, because they clamored with 
pride. They clamored to God and He paid no heed since they were 
not really trying to root out the faults against which they were pray- 
ing. 

An old man, very experienced in these matters, once spiritually 
admonished a proud brother who said in his blindness: "Forgive me, 
father, but I am not proud." "My son," said the wise old man, "what 
better proof of your pride could you have given than to claim that 
you were not proud?" 

A help to the proud is submissiveness, a tougher and humbler 
mode of life, and the reading of the supernatural feats of the Fathers. 
Even then there will perhaps be little hope of salvation for those who 
suffer from this disease. 

While it is disgraceful to be puffed up over the adornments of 
others, it is sheer lunacy to imagine that one has deserved the gifts of 



82a. St. Mirk the Aacetic, (hi Ihe Spirhuiil Law, § 136 (/'G' 65, 921C) (reading i/w/ya-a): 
ET Pbil., § 135, p. 119. 



208 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



God. You may be proud only of the achievements you had before the 
time of your birth. But anything after that, indeed the birth itself, is a 
gift from God. You may claim only those virtues in you that are there 
independently of your mind, for your mind was bestowed on you by 
God. And you may claim only those victories you achieved indepen- 
dently of the body, for the body too is not yours but a work of God. 

Do not be self-confident before judgment has been passed on 
you. Remember the guest at the marriage feast. He got there, and 
then, tied hand and foot, he was thrown into the dark outside (cf. 
Matt. 22:13). So do not be stiff-necked, since you are a material being. 
Many although holy and unencumbered by a body were thrown out 
even from heaven. 

When the demon of pride finds a place for himself among his 
own, he appears to them, in sleep or awake, and he looks like a holy 
angel or martyr and he hints at mysteries to be revealed or spiritual 
gifts to be granted, that the wretches may be deceived and driven ut- 
terly out of their minds. 

If we were to die ten thousand times for Christ, we would still 
not have repaid what we owe, for in value rather than physical sub- 
stance there is no comparison between the blood of God and that of 
1 lis servants. 

We should always be on the lookout to compare ourselves with 
the Fathers and the lights who have gone before us. If we do, we will 
discover that we have scarcely begun the ascetic life, that we have 
hardly kept our vow in a holy manner, and that our thinking is still 
rooted in the world. 

A real monk is one whose soul's eye is not haughty and whose 
l)odily senses are unmoved. 

A monk is one who fights his enemies, like the wild beasts that 
they are, and harries them as he makes his escape from them. 

F'o be a monk is to know ecstasy without end and to grieve for 
life, 

A monk is shaped by virtues in the way that others are shaped by 
pleasures. 

A ninnk ha.s an urifailing light in the eye of the heart. 
'' A monk is an abyss of humility in which every evil spirit Uan 
been plunged and smothered. 

Pride mukes us forge! our sins, for the remembnitice of (ht'in 
lends io liuiiiilii\' 

Pride is uiiei- poverty of soul disguised as rielu-s, iinttiiHitiiv Itulil 



2flW 



JOHN CUMACUS 



where in fact there is darkness. This abominable vice not only stops 
our progress but even tosses us down from the heights we have 
reached. 

The proud man is a pomegranate, gone bad within, radiant out- 
side. 

A proud monk needs no demon. He has turned into one, an ene- 
my to himself. 

Darkness is alien to light. Pride is alien to every virtue. 

Blaspheming words rise up in the hearts of the proud, heavenly 
visions in the hearts of the humble. 

A thief hates the sun. A proud man despises the meek. 

It happens, I do not know how, that most of the proud never 
really discover their true selves. They think they have conquered 
their passions and they find out how poor they really are only after 
they die. 

The man ensnared by pride will need God's help, since man is of 
no use to him. 

I captured this senseless deceiver once. It was rising up in my 
heart and on its shoulders was vainglory, its mother. 1 roped them 
with the noose of obedience and flailed them with the whip of humil- 
ity. Then I lashed them and asked how they had managed to gain ac- 
cess to me. "We have no beginning and no birth," they said, "for we 
are the source and the begetters of all the passions. The strongest op- 
position to us comes from the contrition of heart that grows out of 
obedience. We can endure no authority over us, which is why we fell 
from heaven where we surely had authority. In short, we are the au- 
thors and the progenitors of everything opposed to humility, for ev- 
erything that favors humility brings us low. We prevail everywhere 
except in heaven. So, then, where will you run to escape us? You will 
find us often where there is patient endurance of dishonor, where 
there is obedience and freedom from anger, where there is willing- 
ness to bear no grudge, where one's neighbor is served. And our chil- 
dren are the falls of those who lead the life of the spirit. Their names: 
Anger, Calumny, Spite, Irascibility, Yelling, Blasphemy, Hypocrisy, 
Hatred, Envy, Argumentativeness, Self-will, Disobedience. 

"There is only one thing with which we cannot interfere, and 
the violence you do us will make us admit what this is. If you can 
honestly condemn yourself before the Lord, then indeed you wilt 
find us as flimsy as a cobweb. For, you see, Vainglory is pride's sad- 
dle-horse on which 1 am mounted. But holy Humility and Self-depre- 



210 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



cation will laugh at the horse and its rider and will joyfully sing the 
song of triumph: 'Let us sing to the Lord, for He has been truly glori- 
fied. Horse and rider He has thrown into the sea' (Exod. 15:1), into 
the depths of humility." 

Such is the twenty-third step. Whoever chmbs it, if indeed any- 
one can, will certainly be strong. 

Concerning unspeakably blasphemous Thoughts 

As we have already heard, from a troublesome root and mother 
comes a most troublesome offspring. What I mean is that unspeakable 
blasphemy is the child of dreadful pride. Hence the need to talk about 
it, since it is no ordinary foe but is far and away the deadliest enemy 
of all. Worse still, it is extremely hard to articulate and to confess it 
and therefore to discuss it with a spiritual healer, and the result has 
been to cause frustration and despair in many people, for like a worm 
in a tree this unholy enemy gnaws away all hope. 

This atrocious foe has the habit of appearing during the holy ser- 
vices and even at the awesome hour of thcjMysteries, and blasphem- 
ing the Lord and the consecrated elements, thereby showing that 
the.se unspeakable, unacceptable, and unthinkable words are not ours 
but rather those of the God-hating demon who fled from heaven be- 
cause, it seems, of the blasphemies he uttered there too against the 
Lord. It must be so, for if these dreadful and unholy words are my 
own, how could I offer humble worship after having partaken of the 
sacred gift? How could I revile and praise at the same time? 

I'his deceiver, this destroyer of souls, has often caused men to go 
mad. And no other thought is as difficult to admit in confession, 
which is why so many are dogged by it all their days. In fact nothing 
gives demons and evil thoughts such power over us as to nourish 
them and hide them in our hearts unconfessed. 

If you have blasphemous thoughts, do not think that you are to 
blame, (iod knows what is in our hearts and He knows that ideas of 
ihis kind come not from us but from our enemies. 

Drunkenness leads to stumbling. Pride leads to unholy ihoiighis. 
'i'hc drunkard will be punished not for his stumbling bui lor liiN 
dnnikcnness. 

I hose unclean and unspeakable thoughts come at us vvlictt Wf 
arc [iraying, hut, if we ctmiinuc to pray to the end, tlicy will rrltrai, 
for they do iiol struggle against those who resist ihcm. 

[his unholy demon not only blasphemes (mhI tind t<vt>l>ili<<l|| 



211 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



that is divine. It stirs up the dirtiest and most obscene thoughts with- 
in us, thereby trying to force us to give up praying or to fall into de- 
spair. It stops the prayer of many and turns many away from the holy 
Mysteries. It has evilly and tyrannously caused the bodies of some to 
be worn away with grief. It has exhausted others with fasting and has 
given them no rest. It has struck at people living in the world, and 
also at those leading the monastic life, whispering that there is no sal- 
vation in store for them, murmuring that they are more to be pitied 
than any unbeliever or pagan. 

Anyone disturbed by the spirit of blasphemy and wishing to be 
rid of it should bear in mind that thoughts of this type do not origi- 
nate in his own soul but are caused by that unclean devil who once 
said to the Lord: "I will give you all this if only You fall down and 
adore me" (Matt. 4:9). So let us make light of him and pay no regard 
whatever to his promptings. Let us say: " 'Get behind me, Satan! I 
will worship the Lord my God and I will serve only Him' (Matt. 
4:10). May your word and your effort rebound on you, and your blas- 
phemies come down on your own head now and in the world to 
come." To tackle the demon of blasphemy in any way other than this 
is to be like a man trying to hold lightning in his hands. For how can 
you take a grip on, seize, or grapple with someone who flits into the 
heart quicker than the wind, talks more rapidly than a flash, and then 
immediately vanishes? Every other kind of foe stops, struggles a 
while, lingers and gives one time to grapple with him. But not this 
one. He hardly appears and is gone again immediately. He barely 
speaks and then vanishes. 

This particular demon likes to take up residence in the minds of 
simpler and more innocent souls, and these are more upset and dis- 
turbed by it than others. To such people we could quite rightly say 
that what is happening to them is due not to their own undue self- 
esteem but to the jealousy of the demons. 

Let us refrain from passing judgment or condemnation on our 
neighbor. If we do, then we will not be terrorised by blasphemous 
thoughts, since the one produces the other. 

The situation here is like that of someone shut up in his own 
house who overhears but does not join in the conversation of passers- 
by. The soul that keeps to itself overhears and is disturbed by the 
blasphemies of devils who are merely transients. 

Hold this foe in contempt and you will be liberated from its tor- 
ments. Try cleverly to fight it and you will end up by surrendering. 



212 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



for the man who tries to conquer spirits by talk is like someone hop- 
ing to lock up the winds. 

There was once a zealous monk who was badly troubled by this 
demon. For twenty years he wore himself out with fasting and vigils, 
but to no avail, as he realized. So he wrote the temptation on a sheet 
of paper, went to a certain holy man, handed him the paper, bowed 
his face to the ground and dared not to look up. The old man read it, 
smiled, lifted the brother and said to him: "My son, put your hand on 
my neck." The brother did so. Then the great man said: "Very well, 
brother. Now let this sin be on my neck for as many years as it has 
been or will be active within you. But from now on, ignore it." And 
the monk who had been tempted in this fashion assured me that even 
before he had left the cell of this old man, his infirmity was gone. The 
man who had actually experienced this told me about it, giving 
thanks to Christ. 

He who has defeated this vice has banished pride. 



311 



Step 24 



ON MEEKNESS, 

SIMPLICITY, 

GUILELESSNESS, 

AND WICKEDNESS 



The light of dawn comes before the sun, and meekness is the pre- 
cursor of all humility- So let us listen to the order in which Christ, 
our Light, places these virtues. He says: "Learn from Me, because I 
am meek and humble of heart" (Matt. 11:29). Therefore before gazing 
at the sun of humility we must let the light of meekness flow over us. 
If we do, we will then be able to look steadily at the sun. The true 
order of these virtues teaches us that we are totally unable to turn our 
eyes to the sun before we have first become accustomed to the light. 

Meekness is a mind consistent amid honor or dishonor. Meekness 
prays quietly and sincerely for a neighbor however troublesome he 
may be. Meekness is a rock looking out over the sea of anger which 
breaks the waves which come crashing on it and stays entirely un- 
moved. Meekness is the bulwark of patience, the door, indeed the 
mother of love, and the foundation of discernment. For it is said: 
"The Lord will teach His ways to the meek" (Ps. 24:9). And it is 
meekness that earns pardon for our sins, gives confidence to our 
prayers and makes a place for the Holy Spirit. "To whom shall 1 look 
if not the meek and the peaceful?" (Isa. 66:2). 

Meekness works alongside of obedience, guides a religious com- 



214 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



munity, checks frenzy, curbs anger. It is a minister of joy, an imita- 
tion of Christ, the possession of angels, a shackle for demons, a shield 
against bitterness. The Lord finds rest in the hearts of the meek, 
while the turbulent spirit is the home of the devil. "The meek shall 
inherit the earth" (Matt. 5:.'>), indeed, rule over it; and the bad-tem- 
pered shall be carried off as booty from their land. 

A meek soul is a throne of simplicity, but a wrathful mind is a 
creator of evil. 

A gentle soul will make a place for wise words, since the "Lord 
will guide the meek in judgment" (Ps. 24:9), or rather, in discretion. 

An upright soul is the companion of humility, but an evil one is 
the daughter of pride. 

The souls of the meek shall be filled with wisdom, but the angry 
mind will cohabit with darkness and ignorance. 

A bad-tempered man met a dissembler, and not an honest word 
passed between them, for if you open the heart of the one you will 
find frenzy, and if you examine the soul of the other you will see 
malice. ^ 

Simplicity is an enduring habit within a soul that has grown im- 
pervious to evil thoughts. 

Evil is a deliberate kind of knowledge. Or, rather, it is a deformi- 
ty of the devil. There is no truth in it. And it imagines it can avoid 
being detected by many. 

Hypocrisy is soul and body in a state of opposition to each other, 
intertwined with every kind of invention. 

Guilelessness is the joyful condition of an uncalculating soul. 

Honesty is innocent thought, a genuine character, speech that is 
neither artificial nor premeditated. 

Innocence is a soul as pure as the day it was created and always 
concerned for everyone. 

Malice is honesty perverted, a deluded thought, a lying disposi- 
tion, perjury, and ambiguous words. Malice is a false heart, an abyss 
of cunning, deceit that has become habitual, pride that is second na- 
ture. It is the foe of humility, a fake penitence, mourning depleted,"' 
a refusal to confess, an insistence on getting one's own way. It is ilir 
agent of lapses, a hindrance to resurrection, a tolerance of wrrmgdo- 
ing, false grief, false '•cverence. It is life gone diabolical. 

I'lu- tvil man is the namesake and companion of the devil, whii l< 



HI. (ik fnijti'vimi'.r. 1 1 I \t rr.iits miiiryfimts, "iiii (*slrMii|{c'iiu'ril Iikiii iiiiMlfMillH " 



215 



JOIINCIJMACUS 



is why the Lord inuj^lii us in I'lill the devil by that name, saying, "De- 
liver us from the I'vil Otu-" (Mnii. 6;1.?). 

Let us run honi ilu' i)rrri()icf of hypocrisy, from the pit of du- 
plicity. Let us heed the words of him who said: "The evildoers shall 
be destroyed" (Ps. ^{y.')]- "like ihc tjr;iss they shall wither and like 
green herbs shall they f;ill nwiiy" (ef, Ps. .^6:2). People of this kind are 
fodder for demons. 

God is called uprightness just ;is I le is called love. This is why in 
the Song of Songs the wise man says to the [Hire heart: "Uprightness 
has loved you" (Song of Songs 1:4). Ihe father of the wise man says: 
"The Lord is good and upright" (Ps 24:M). I le says that those who are 
God's namesakes are saved: "He saves the upright of heart" (Ps. 7:11). 
"His countenance sees and visits the honest and the just" (Ps. 10;8). 

Unadorned simplicity is the first characteristic of childhood. As 
long as Adam had it, he saw neither the nakedness of his soul nor the 
indecency of his flesh. 

Good and blessed is that simplicity which some have by nature, 
but better is that which has been goaded out of wickedness by hard 
work. The former is protected from much complexity and the pas- 
sions, while the latter is the gateway to the greatest humility and 
meekness. There is not much reward for the one and no end of re- 
ward for the other. 

If you wish to draw the Lord to you, approach Him as disciples 
to a master, in all simplicity, openly, honestly, without duplicity, 
without idle curiosity. He is simple and uncompounded-^"* And He 
wants the souls that come to Him to be simple and pure. Indeed you 
will never see simplicity separated from humility. 

The evil man is a false prophet. He imagines that from words he 
can catch thoughts, from appearances the truth of the heart. 

1 have seen good souls turn evil from the example of evil people, 
and it amaxed me that they could so quickly shed their natural sim- 
plicity and innocence. But it is as easy for the honest to lapse as it is 
hard for evildoers to change their ways. Still, a genuine turning away 
from the world, obedience, and a guarding of the lips have often 
proved very effective and have wonderfully restored those who 
seemed to be beyond recall. 

If knowledge can cause most people to become vain, perhaps ig- 



K4. Cf. St. Basil, Adversus Eiinomium I, 23 {FG 29, .564A). 



216 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



norance and lack of learning can make them humble. Yet now and 
again you find men who pride themselves on their ignorance. 

Paul the Simple,^' that thrice-blessed man, was a shining exam- 
ple to us. He was the measure and type of blessed simplicity, and no 
one has ever seen or heard or could see so much progress in so short a 
time. 

A simple monk is like a dumb but rational and obedient animal. 
He lays his burden on his spiritual director. And like the animal who 
never answers back to the master who yokes him, the upright soul 
does not talk back to his superior. Instead, he follows where he is di- 
rected to go and will raise no protest even if sent to his death. 

"It is hard for the rich to enter the kingdom" (Matt. 19:23). It is 
hard too for the foolishly "wise" to enter simplicity. 

A lapse often saves the clever man, bringing him salvation and 
innocence in spite of himself. 

Fight to escape from your own cleverness. If you do, then you 
will find salvation and an uprightness through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Amen. , 

If you have the strength to take this step, do not lose heart. For 
now you are imitating Christ your Master and you have been saved. 



K,'. Puul ihc Sirnplf went off to \mn St. Antony in the desert nftor iMUhiim Kin 
wife in the uct of adultery. Si. Aniony thiiught hitti too old to licioinc .\ tnoiilt, Iml l*iilll 
KuliIllittLHl 111 iKf srvrrcM disfiivlitii- viilli siifh tinijUcMioniiiH tilinliencf lliiM HI il tfll' 
lively sliurl Iiimc Iu- LUiiuiri-il s|iinlii.il (lowers t-irii ^ri-JlLM- lliiin llnnr nl Nt AltMiliy, 
Sci- I'iiil.iiiius, ihr l.iiiitiiii l/itliiry. I'll .'2, I'/jf livfs ii/' llv DvinI l',il/ifi\, i'|( J4| Th Stt^lHgl 
uj llv Dru-ii lulhii, I'rtili ihr Sini|ilr, 



217 



Step 2S 



ON HUMILITY 



Do you imagine that plain words can precisely or truly or appro- 
priately or clearly or sincerely describe the love of the Lord, humil- 
ity, blessed purity, divine enlightenment, fear of God, and assurance 
of the heart? Do you imagine that talk of such matters will mean any- 
thing to someone who has never experienced them? If you think so, 
then you will be like a man who with words and examples tries to 
convey the sweetness of honey to people who have never tasted it. He 
talks uselessly. Indeed I would say he is simply prattling. The same 
applies in the first instance. A man stands revealed as either having 
had no experience of what he is talking about or as having fallen into 
the grip of vainglory. 

Our theme sets before us as a touchstone a treasure stored safely 
in earthen vessels, that i.s, in our bodies. This treasure is of a quality 
that eludes adequate description. It carries an inscription of heavenly 
origin which is therefore incomprehensible so that anyone seeking 
words for it is faced with a great and endless task. The inscription 
reads as follows: "Holy Humility." 

Let all who are led by the Spirit of God come with us into this 
spiritual and wise assembly. Let them hold in their spiritual hands 
the tablet.s of knowledge inscribed by God Himself. We have come to- 
gether. We have put our questions. We have searched for the meaning 
of this precious inscription. 



2IH 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



"Humility is constant forgetfulness of one's achievements," 
someone says. 

"It is the admission that in all the world one is the least impor- 
tant and is also the greatest sinner," another says. 

"It is the mind's awareness that one is weak and helpless," a third 
says. 

"It is to forestall one's neighbor at a contentious moment and to 
be the first to end a quarrel." 

"It is the acknowledgement of divine grace and divine mercy." 
"It is the disposition of a contrite soul and the abdication of one's 
own will." 

I listened to all this and thought it over carefully and soberly, 
and was not able to grasp the sense of that blessed virtue from what I 
had heard. I was the last to speak; and, like a dog gathering crumbs 
from a table, I collected what those learned and blessed fathers had 
said and went on from there to propose my own definition: "Humil- 
ity is a grace in the soul and with a name known only to those who 
have had experience of it. It is indescribable wealth, a name and a gift 
from God. 'Learn from Me,' He said; that is, not from an angel, not 
from a man, not from a book, but 'from Me,' that is, from My dwell- 
ing within you, from My illumination and action within you, for 'I 
tm gentle and meek of heart' (Matt. 11:29) in thought and in spirit, 
and your souls will find rest from conflicts and relief from evil 
thoughts." 

The appearance of this sacred vine is one thing during the winter 
of passions, another in the springtime of flowering, and still another 
in the harvesttime of all the virtues. Yet all these appearances have 
one thing in common, namely, joy and the bearing of fruit, and they 
all give sure signs and evidence of the harvest to come. As soon as the 
clu.ster of holy humility begins to flower within us, we come, after 
hard work, to hate all earthly praise and glory. We rid ourselves of 
r»ge and fury; and the more this queen of virtues spreads within our 
souls tlirough spiritual growth, the more we begin to regard all our 
j|ood deeds as of no consequence, in fact as loathsome. For every day 
We soriiehow imagine that we are adding to our l)urdcn bv hit iniio- 
nini scaiiering, that the very abundance of CJod's gifts to \\s i,« iti) 
much in excess of what we deserve that the punishment due to iin Im»« 
comes thereby nil the greater, I lence our minds rem;im %r-i uic, Im Itt'il 
Up 111 the purse of inodcsly, iiwarc of the knocks .iiul liir \w\^ u| 



2 IV 



JOHN CI.IMACUS 



thieves and yet uiilrouhlid l>v itu-tn, because modesty is an unassail- 
able strongroom. 

We have so far risked ;t lew words of a philosophical kind regard- 
ing the blossoming and the growth of this everblooming fruit. But 
those of you who are close to the Lord [[iniself must find out from 
Him what the perfect reward is of this holy virtue, since there is no 
way of measuring the sheer abundance of such blessed wealth, nor 
could words convey its quality. Neveriheless, we must try to express 
the thoughts that occur to us about its distinguishing characteristics. 

Real repentance, mourning scrubbed of all impurity, and holy 
humility among beginners are as different and distinct from one an- 
other as yeast and flour from bread. The soul is ground and refined 
by visible repentance. The waters of true mourning bring it to a cer- 
tain unity. I would even go so far as to speak of a mingling with God. 
Then, kindled by the fire of the Lord, blessed humility is made into 
bread and made firm without the leaven of pride. The outcome of all 
this is a three-stranded cord (cf. Eccles. 4:12), a heavenly rainbow 
coming together as a single power and energy, with its own effects 
and characteristics. Speak of one and we imply the other two. And I 
will now briefly try to prove the truth of what I am saying. 

The first and principal token of this excellent and admirable tri- 
ad is the delighted readiness of the soul to accept indignity, to receive 
it with open arms, to welcome it as something that relieves and cau- 
terizes diseases of the soul and grevious sins. The second token is the 
wiping out of anger — and modesty over the fact that it has subsided. 
Third and preeminent is the honest distrust of one's own virtues, to- 
gether with an unending desire to learn more. 

"The end of the law and the prophets is Christ, for the justifica- 
tion of every believer" (Rom. 10:4). And the end of impure passions is 
vainglory and pride for every man who fails to deal with the problem. 
But their destroyer is a spiritual stag*^ which keeps the man who 
lives with it safe from every poison. The deadly bane of hypocrisy 
and of calumny can surely never appear where there is humility. 
Where will this snake nestle and hide? Will it not be pulled out from 
the heart's earth to be killed and done away with? Where there is hu- 



86, The stag was thought to be able to kill snakes after first drawmg iheiii out of 
their holes with the breath of its nostrils (cf. Origen, Horn. 2, II in Cant. : PC, 13. if>C). 



220 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



mility there will be no sign of hatred, no species of quarrelsomeness, 
no whiff of disobedience — unless of course some question of faith 
arises. The man with humility for his bride will be gentle, kind, in- 
clined to compunction, sympathetic, calm in every situation, radiant, 
easy to get along with, inoffensive, alert and active. In a word, free 
from passion. "The Lord remembered us in our humility and deliv- 
ered us from our enemies" (Ps. 135:23-24), that is, from our passions 
and from our impurities. 

A humble monk will not preoccupy himself with mysteries. A 
proud monk busies himself with the hidden judgments of God. 

Demons once heaped praise on one of the most discerning of the 
brothers. They even appeared to him in visible form. But this very 
wise man spoke to them as follows: "If you cease to praise me by way 
of the thoughts of my heart, I shall consider myself to be great and 
outstanding because of the fact that you have left me. But if you con- 
tinue to praise me, I must deduce from such praise that I am very im- 
pure indeed, since every proudhearted man is unclean before the 
Lord (cf. Prov. 16:5). So leave me, and I shall become great, or else 
praise me, and with your help I shall earn more humility." Struck by 
this dilemma, they vanished. 

Let not your soul be a hollow in the stream of life, a hollow some- 
times full and sometimes dried up by the heat of vainglory and pride. 
Instead, may your soul be a spring-head of dispassion that wells up 
into a river of poverty. Friend, remember that corn and the fruit of 
the spirit will stand high in the valleys (cf. Ps. 64:14). The valley is a 
soul made humble among the mountains of labors and virtues. It al- 
ways remains unproud and steadfast. In Scripture are the words, "I 
humbled myself, and the Lord hastened to rescue me" (Ps. 1 14:6); and 
these words are there instead of "I have fasted," "I have kept vigil," "I 
lay down on the bare earth." 

Repentance lifts a man up. Mourning knocks at heaven's gate. 
Holy humility opens it. This I say, and I worship a Trinity in Unity 
mid a Unity in Trinity. 

The sun lights up everything visible. Humility reaches across ev- 
erything done according to reason. Where there is no light, all is in 
ditrkiiess. Where there is no humility, all is rotten. 

In the entire universe there is a unique place that shw ihr inn 
)u!it once. And tlu-re is :i unititic thought that has given rise lo liuiiiil- 



321 



JOHN CIJMACUS 



ity. ! here was ;i uni(|U(' tl.iy on which the whole world rejoiced. And 
there is n uiiicjuc viriiie ihc demons c;innot imitate. ^^ 

I o exalt orie.scir isoiie iliirij^, not to do .so another, and to humble 
oneself is something el.se entirely. A man may always be passing judg- 
ment on others, while .iiintiu-r man passes judgment neither on others 
nor on himself. A third, however, though actually guiltless, may al- 
ways be passing judgment oti himself". 

There is a difference l>etween being humble, striving for humil- 
ity, and praising the humble. I he first is a mark of the perfect, the 
second of the obedient, and the third of all the faithful. 

A man truly humble within himself will never find his tongue 
betraying him. What is not in the treasury cannot be brought out 
through the door. 

A solitary horse can often imagine itself to be at full gallop, but 
when it finds itself in a herd it then discovers how slow it actually is. 
A first sign of emerging health is when our thoughts are no long- 
er filled with a proud sense of our aptitudes. As long as the stench of 
pride lingers in the nose, the fragrance of myrrh will go unnoticed. 

Holy humility had this to say: "The one who loves me will not 
condemn someone, or pass judgment on anyone, or lord it over some- 
one else, or show off his wisdom until he has been united with me. A 
man truly joined to me is no longer in bondage to the Law." 

1 he unholy demons once began to murmur praise in the heart of 
an ascetic who was struggling to achieve blessed humility. However, 
God inspired him to use a holy trick to defeat the cleverness of these 
spirits. The monk got up and on the wall of his cell he wrote in se- 
quence the names of the major virtues: perfect love, angelic humility, 
pure prayer, unassailable chastity, and others of a similar kind. 1 he 
result was that whenever vainglorious thoughts began to puff him up, 
he would say: "Come! Let us go to be judged." Going to the wall he 
would read the names there and would cry out to himself: "When you 



H7. The scholiast explains two of these allusions a,s follows: "The unique place is 
the floor of the Red Sea during the crossing of Israel. The day of universal joy is none 
other than the day of the resurrection of our Lord and Savior, on which our race wa.s 
freed from the eternal bonds of Hades. Others say that it is the day of the nativity, on 
which the glory to God in the highest of the angels was heard. Others say that it is the 
day on which Noah and his companions came out of the ark" (scholion 10 (lOO.iBI). Ac- 
cording to another scholion, attributed to John of Raithu, the unique thought i.s "the 
constant thought of death, and meditation on eternal judgment and on the Cros.s and 
death of Christ" (PC «8. 12.?6C). The unique virtue is humility. 



222 



THE LADDER OF DI\TNE ASCENT 



have every one of these virtues within you, then you will have an ac- 
curate sense of how far from God you still are." 

No one of us can describe the power and nature of the sun. We 
can merely deduce its intrinsic nature from its characteristics and ef- 
fects. So too with humility, which is a God-given protection against 
seeing our own achievements. It is an abyss of self-abasement to 
which no thief can gain entry. It is a tower of strength against the 
enemy. "Against him the enemy will not prevail and the son (or, rath- 
er, the thought) of iniquity will do him no harm and he will cut off 
his enemies before him" (Ps, 88:23-24) and will put to flight those 
who hate him. 

The great possessor of this treasure has other properties in his 
soul besides those referred to above. These properties, with one ex- 
ception, are manifest tokens of this wealth. You will know that you 
have this holy gift within you and not be led astray when you experi- 
ence an abundance of unspeakable light together with an indescrib- 
rtl>le love of prayer. Even before reaching this stage, you may have it, 
if in your heart you pass no judgment on the faults of others. And a 
precursor of what we have described is hatred of all vainglory. 

The man who has come to know himself with the full awareness 
of his soul has sown in good ground. However, anyone who has not 
sown in this way cannot expect humility to flower within him. And 
anyone who has acquired knowledge of self has come to understand 
the fear of the Lord, and walking with the help of this fear, he has 
urrived at the doorway of love. For humility is the door to the king- 
dom, opening up to those who come near. It was of that door, I be- 
lieve, that the Lord spoke when He said: "He shall go in and come out 
of life" and not be afraid "and he shall find pasture" (John 10:8-9) and 
the green grass of Paradise. And whoever has entered monastic life by 
some other door is a thief and a robber of his own life. 

I hose of us who wish to gain understanding must never stop ex- 
amining ourselves and if in the perception of your soul you realize 
lliiU your neighbor is superior to you in all respects, then the mercy 
of (ioti is surely near at hand. 

Snow cannot burst into flames. It is even less possible for humil- 
ity 1o al)i(le in a lieretie. This achievement belongs only tn the pious 
and the faithful, anti then only when they have been puiilnd 
|. Most of us would describe ourselves as sinners. And ))rrliii|>k wo 
rriilly (hitik so. \hn it is iniligiiit\' iliui shows up the true Mute nt llip 
hcnirt. 



I2i 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



Whoever is eiiyer for the peaceful haven of humility will never 
cease to do nil In- possibly ciHi to get there, and with words and 
thoughts, with consider;)! ions and explanations, with questionings 
and probings, with c\ery device, with prayer and supplication, with 
meditation and reflection, he v,\\\ push onward, helped by God, hu- 
miliated and despised and toiling mightily, and he will sail the ship of 
his sou! out from the ever-stormy ocean of vainglory. For the man de- 
livered from this sin wins ready pardon for all his other sins, like the 
publican in Scripture. 

Some drive out empty pride by thinking to the end of their lives 
of their past misdeeds, for which they were forgiven and which now 
serve as a spur to humility. Others, remembering the passion of 
Christ, think of themselves as eternally in debt. Others hold them- 
-selves in contempt when they think of their daily lapses. Others come 
to possess this mother of graces by way of their continuous tempta- 
tions, weaknesses, and sins.^^ There are some — and I cannot say if 
they are to be found nowadays — who humble themselves in propor- 
tion to the gifts they receive from God and live with a sense of their 
unworthiness to have such wealth bestowed on them, so that each day 
they think of themselves as sinking further into debt. That is real hu- 
mility, real beatitude, a real reward! And you may be sure that it is by 
this particularly blessed route that anyone has traveled who in a few 
short years has arrived at the summit of dispassion. 

Love and humility make a holy team. The one exalts. The other 
supports those who have been exalted and never falls. 

There is a difference between contrition, self-knowledge, and hu- 
mility. 

Contrition is the outcome of a lapse. A man who has lapsed 
breaks down and prays without arrogance, though with laudable per- 
sistence, disarrayed and yet clinging to the staff of hope, indeed using 
it to drive off the dog of despair. 

Self-knowledge is a clear-eyed notion of one's own spiritual ad- 
vance. It is also an unwavering remembrance of one's lightest sins. 

Humility is a spiritual teaching of Christ led spiritually like a 
bride into the inner chamber of the soul of those deemed worthy of it, 
and it somehow eludes all description. 



8K. H'['M has a fuller version of -this sentence: "Others, as a result of their licsti- 
ting temptations, infirmities and sins, have mortified their pride. Others for want of 
graces have appropriated the mother of graces (i.e. humility)." 



224 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



A man says that he is experiencing the full fragrance of this 
myrrh within him. Someone happens to praise him, and if he feels the 
slightest stir of the heart or if he grasps the full import of what is be- 
ing said, then he is certainly mistaken, and let him have no illusion 
about that fact. 

"Not to us, not to us, but to Your name, O Lord, give glory" (Ps. 
113:9). I once heard a man say this with total sincerity. He was a man 
who well understood that human nature is such that it cannot remain 
unharmed by praise. "My praise shall be from You in the great assem- 
bly, Lord" (Ps. 21:26), that is, in the life to come, and 1 cannot accept 
it before that without risk to myself 

If the outer limit, the rule, and the characteristic of extreme 
pride is for a man to make a show of having virtues he does not actu- 
ally possess for the sake of glory, then surely the token of extreme hu- 
mility will be to lower ourselves by claiming weaknesses we do not 
really have. This was what one man did when he took the bread and 
cheese in his hands. ^' This too was the way of the man who was free 
of all fleshly lust but who used to take his'clothes off and parade na- 
ked through the whole city.^° Men like these do not worry about giv- 
ing scandal, for through prayer they have received the power to 
reassure all men invisibly. Indeed, to be afraid of censure is to show 
lack of ability in prayer. And when God is ready to hear our prayers 
we can achieve anything. 

Better to offend man than God. For God is delighted when He 
sees us courting dishonor for the purpose of crushing, striking, and 
destroying our empty self-esteem. And virtue of this sort comes only 
from a complete abandonment of the world and only the really great 
can endure the derision of their own folk. This should not surprise 
you. The fact is that no one can climb a ladder in a single stride. And 
in this matter it is not on account of the devils subjected to us that 
men will recognize us as disciples of God, but because our names are 
written in the heaven of humility (cf. Luke 10:20). 

A lemon tree naturally lifts its branches upwards when it has no 
fruit. The more its branches bend, the more fruit you will find there. 
The meaning of this will be clear to the man disposed io undcrst.itid 
it. 

Holy humility receives from God the power to yield liiiii iliitiv 



H'>, ,'\Uliii Siiniin il.v Siiym^i III llie tkuil iulhfis, Sitnuii. 

WO, S(ini|>uiii ili(- Siiiilonitr: t'nlliailluii, Tb< iMutiac llislnry, I'h 17. 



225 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



fold, sixtyfokl ;iiui a lMin<irt(lti>ld. The dispassionate attain that last 
degree, the couiMgcoiis ihc middle, and everyone can rise to the first. 

The man who has cotnc (o know himself is never fooled into 
reaching for what is beyond him. He keeps his feet henceforth on the 
blessed path of humilitv. 

Just as birds fear the sight of a hawk, those who practice humility 
fear the sound of an argument. 

Many have attained salvation without the aid of prophecies, illu- 
mination, signs and wonders. But without humility no one will enter 
the marriage chamber, for humility is the guardian of such gifts. 
Without it, they will bring disaster on the frivolous. 

Because of our unwillingness to humble ourselves, God has ar- 
ranged that no one can see his own faults as clearly as his neighbor 
does. Hence our obligation to be grateful not to ourselves but to our 
neighbor and to God for our healing. 

A humble man will always hate his own will as a cause of error. 
In his petitions to the Lord which he makes with unwavering faith he 
learns what he should do and obeys. He does not spend his time scru- 
tinizing the lifestyle of his superiors. He lays all his burden on the 
God Who used an ass to teach Balaam what had to be done. All the 
acts, thoughts, and words of such a man are directed to the will of 
God and he never trusts himself. Indeed, to a humble man, self-confi- 
dence is as much a thorn and a burden as the orders of someone else 
are to a proud man. 

In my opinion, an angel is characterized by the fact that he is not 
tricked into sinning. And I hear those words of an earthly angeh'^ "I 
am aware of nothing against myself and yet I am not thereby justi- 
fied. It is the Lord Who is my Judge" (1 Cor. 4:4). So we must always 
condemn and criticize ourselves in order that by means of deliberate- 
ly chosen humiliations we may protect ourselves from unwitting sin. 
And if we do not do this, our punishment at death will be heavy in- 
deed. 

The man who asks God for less than he deserves will certainly 
receive more, as is shown by the publican who begged forgiveness but 
obtained salvation (cf Luke 18:10-14). And the robber asked only to 
be remembered in the kingdom, yet he inherited all of Paradise (cf. 
Luke 23:43). 

In the created world fire cannot naturally be both small and 



91. [n Greek "angel" means "messenger." 



22f> 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN I 



great at one and the same time. Humility cannot be genuine and at 
one and the same time have a worldly strain.''^ Genuine humility is 
not in us if we fall into voluntary sin, and this is the sign that there is 
something material still within us. 

The Lord understood that the virtue of the soul is shaped by our 
outward behavior. He therefore took a towel and showed us how to 
walk the road of humility (cf. John 13:4). The soul indeed is molded 
by the doings of the body, conforming to and taking shape from what 
it does. To one of the angels it was the fact of being a ruler that led to 
pride, though it was not for this reason that the prerogative was origi- 
nally granted to him. 

A man who sits on a throne acts in one way, and the man who 
sits on a dunghill acts in another. That, perhaps, is the reason why 
that great and just man''^ sat on the dunghill outside the city. Totally 
humbled, he said in all sincerity, "I despise myself, waste away" (Job 
42:6), and have regarded myself as dust and ashes. 

I note that Manasseh sinned like no other man. He defiled the 
temple of God with idols and he contaminated the sacred Liturgy (cf 
4 [2] Kings 21:4). A fast by all the world could not have made repara- 
tion for his sin, and yet humility could heal his incurable wound. "If 
You wanted sacrifice I would have given it," David says to God, "but 
You will not be satisfied with holocausts," that is, with bodies worn 
out by fasting. "The sacrifice for God is a contrite spirit. God will not 
despise a humble and contrite heart" (Ps. 50:17). Following on adul- 
tery and murder, blessed humility once cried out to God, "I have 
sinned against the Lord," and the reply was heard: "The Lord has put 
away your sin" (2 Kings [2 Sam.] 12:13). 

The wonderful Fathers proclaimed physical labor to be the way 
to and the foundation of humility. To this I would add obedience and 
honesty of heart, since these are by nature opposed to self-aggrandize- 
ment. 

If pride turned some of the angels into demons, then humilitv 
can doubtless make angels out of demons. So take heart, all you sin- 
ners. 



'>}. This pus.snyt' is iilisfiirtv It rriiiy he rranshiiod alternatively: "ll is iiiipim^ililr HI 
Me a fire, wIumIht sitiull nr uri'.il, cviMinn by iiaturL- in aii\ creiiuiriv Sniillitily, II || 
impdssiblc III set- iiiiv inn'c nl llic- (ixtn ul Miiilter (i.r., sml rMslinji m KPttlllMt* ilUltlll' 

lt,v" 

'-It. If, Joli. 



227 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



Let us strive with all our might to reach that summit of humility, 
or let us at least chmh onto her shoulders. And if this is too much for 
us, let us at least not tumble out of her arms, since after such a tumble 
a man will scarcely receive any kind of everlasting gift. 

Humility has its signs. It also has its sinews and its ways, and 
these are as follows — poverty, withdrawal from the world, the con- 
cealment of one's wisdom, simplicity of speech, the seeking of alms, 
the disguising of one's nobility, the exclusion of free and easy rela- 
tionships, the banishment of idle talk. 

Nothing can ever so humble the soul as destitution and the sub- 
sistence of a beggar. We will show ourselves true lovers of wisdom 
and of God if we stubbornly run away from all possibility of aggran- 
dizement. 

If you wish to fight against some passion, take humility as your 
ally, for she will tread on the asp and the basilisk of sin and despair, 
and she will trample under foot the lion and the serpent of physical 
devilishness and cunning <cf Ps. 90:13). 

Humility is a heavenly waterspout which can lift the soul from 
the abyss up to heaven's height. 

Someone discovered in his heart how beautiful humility is, and 
in his amazement he asked her to reveal her parent's name. Humility 
smiled, joyous and serene: "Why are you in such a rush to learn the 
name of my begetter? He has no name, nor will I reveal him to you 
until you have God for your possession. To Whom be glory forever." 
Amen. 

The sea is the source of the fountain, and humility is the source 
of discernment. 



22H 



Step 26 



ON DISCERNMENT 



Among beginners, discernment is real self-knowledge; among 
those midway along the road to perfection,' it is a spiritual capacity to 
distinguish unfailingly between what is truly good and what in na- 
ture is opposed to the good; among the perfect, it is a knowledge re- 
suiting from divine illumination, which with its lamp can light up 
what is dark in others. To put the matter generally, discernment is — 
and is recognized to be — a solid understanding of the will of God in 
all times, in all places, in all things; and it is found only among those 
who are pure in heart, in body, and in speech. 

The man who has devoutly destroyed within himself the three 
has also destroyed the five.^"* If he has neglected any of the former, 
then he will not be able to overcome even a single passion. 

Discernment is an uncorrupted conscience. It is pure perception. 

No one seeing or hearing something in monastic life that has a 
force over and beyond nature should, out of ignorance, become unbe- 
lieving. For much that is supernatural happens where the supernatu- 
ral (iod abides. 

Kvery demonic upheaval within us arises from the following 
three related causes, namely, carelessness, pride, or the envy of dc> 



'■H Aii-oi'(iiiij; m l''viij.(riiis {I'hil., p'K), llii- throe priiu-ijwl rvil ili(ii<((tuii inr )|lll|i 
(iiiij. Viiiii|,{loiv mill iiviirirc, llirx" hivt risf t'> tlic oilier live, liisi, ili't|iiMl<lt'iu')<, |irllli, 

dcici'ii'iii mill .iiiK<'i CI riiiihinis, ;i'ino.M(:), p. 2H; ^Ui^ iiu- ricritiT, |i. M. 



220 



JOHN CUMACUS 



mons. The first is fiiiial.Ic, the second deplorable, but the third is 
blessed. 

Let our (.■oti-directiHl'''^ loiiscience be our aim and rule in every- 
thing so that, knowing how ihc wind is blowing, we may set our sails 
accordingly.'**' 

Amid all our efforts to please (;<>d, three pitfalls lie, prepared for 
us by demons. First is their attempt to impede any sort of worthwhile 
achievement; and if this fails, they strive secondly to ensure that what 
we do should not be in accordance with the will of God. And if the 
scoundrels fail in this too, then they stand quietly before our soul and 
praise us for the fact that in every respect we are living as God would 
wish. We should fight these risks, the first by zeal and fear of death, 
the second by obedience and self-abasement, the third by unceasing 
self-condemnation. "This work is ahead of us until the fire of God 
shall enter our sanctuary" (of. Ps. 72:16-17), and then indeed the pow- 
er of our predispositions will no longer constrain us. For our God is a 
fire consuming all lusts, all stirrings of passion, all predispositions, 
and ail hardness of heart, both within and without, both visible and 
spiritual. 

Demons, on the other hand, bring about the very opposite to all 
this. Grabbing a soul, they put out the light of the mind until in our 
wretchedness we find ourselves lacking sobriety or discernment, self- 
knowledge or shame; and we are burdened instead with indifference, 
insensitivity, want of discernment, and blindness. 

All of this is well known to those who have abandoned fornica- 
tion and become chaste, who have reined in their tongues and 
switched from shamelessness to modesty. They know that when the 
mind was cleansed, its callousness ended, or rather its mutilation 
healed, shame filled them for what they said and did previously in the 
season of their blindness. 



95. HTM reads meta tbeon instead of kata theon: "After God, let us have our con- 
science," etc. 

96. The scholiast comments: "A ship is sometimes overwhelmed by storms from 
without, and sometimes sinks through springing a leak within. We too sometimes per- 
ish through sms committed externally, and sometimes are destroyed bv evil thoughts 
withm. We must therefore both keep watch for the external attacks of spirits and bail 
out the impurity of evil thoughts within. Only more effort must be made w.th the un- 
derstanding against evil thoughts" Ucholion 4 [1037AB]). 



230 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



If the day of our soul does not turn to evening and become dark, 
no thieves will come then to rob or slay or ruin our soul.'' 

Robbery is a hidden bondage of the soul. The slaying of the soul 
is the death of a rational mind that has fallen into evil ways. Ruin is 
despair of oneself following on a breach of God's law. 

No one should plead inability to do what is asked of us in the gos- 
pels, since there are souls who have accomplished far more than is 
commanded. Of this truth you will be entirely persuaded, given what 
is said about the man who loved his neighbor more than himself and 
who laid down his life for him, in spite of the fact that the Lord had 
not ordered him to do so.''*' 

Those who have been humbled by their passions should take 
heart. Even if they tumble into every pit, even if they are trapped by 
every snare, even if they suffer every disease, still after their return to 
health they become a light to all, they prove to be doctors, beacons, 
pilots. They teach us the characteristics of every malady and out of 
their own experience they can rescue those about to lapse. 

Anyone in the grip of previous bad [labits and yet still able to 
give teaching, although only by their words, should do so. (Of course, 
they should not hold positions of authority.) Shamed by their own 
words, they may finally begin to practice what they preach. And 
there may even happen in their case what I have seen happen with 
people stuck in the mud. Mired themselves, they warned passersby, 
telling how they had sunk, explaining this for their salvation so that 
they too might not fall in the same manner, and the omnipotent God 
rescued them from the mud so that the others might be saved. 

But anyone who is dominated by passions and who quite willing- 
ly embraces pleasure should be a lesson by his very silence. Jesus be- 
gan both "to do and to teach" (Acts 1:1). 

We humble monks have to travel a truly dangerous sea, a sea full 
of winds, rocks, and whirlpools, of pirates, waterspouts, and shallows, 
of mon.sters and waves. A rock in the soul is wild and sudden anger. 
A whirlpool is the hopelessness that lays hold of the mind on every 
side and struggles to drag it into the depths of despair. A shallow is 



V7. MTM adds two senlenccM "Theft is loss of properly, lliid iv itiiiii|{ whill ll 
liol )j<(ikI as 11 il were jjond " 

<.>K. Aliba l.eoof ( :apfiadiK'ia, whn |{iivc his life to redeem ihrcr I'UjiOvp (lMlllk«i tIPf 
|iihii Miisiliiis, I'liiiiiiii SfiinlHdIf. ill 112, 



.'11 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



the ignorance that makes a good of what is evil. A monster is this 
gross and savage body. Pirates are those deadly servants of vainglory 
who snatch our cargo, the hard-won earnings of our virtues. A wave 
is the swollen and packed stomach that by its gluttony hands us over 
to the beast. A waterspout is pride, the pride that flings us down from 
heaven, bears us up to the sky, and then dashes us into the lowest 
depths. 

Educators can distinguish between the programs of study suit- 
able for beginners, for the intermediate, and for teachers. And we 
ought to ensure that we do not spend an unduly long time at the be- 
ginner's stage, for it would be a disgrace to have an old man going to 
kindergarten. 

Here for everyone is an excellent alphabet: A — obedience, B — 
fasting, r— sackcloth, A— ashes, E — tears, 2 — confession, H — silence, 
0— humility, I— vigil, K— bravery. A— cold, M— struggle, N— hard 
work, E— humiliation, O — contrition, 0— forgetfulness of wrongs, 
P — brotherly love, 2 — meekness, T — simple and unquestioning faith, 
Y — freedom from worldly concern, <t> — unhating rejection of parents, 
X — detachment, f — innocent simplicity, ft — voluntary abasement. 

For the advanced, the following is a good plan and indeed a sign 
of progress: lack of vainglory, freedom from anger, good hope, still- 
ness, discernment, continuous remembrance of the judgment, com- 
passion, hospitality, gentleness in criticism, passionless prayer, lack of 
avarice. 

And a measure, rule, and law for those in the flesh aiming at per- 
fection in spirit and body is the following: A — an unfettered heart, 
B — perfect love, F — a well of humility, A — a detached mind, E — an 
indwelling of Christ, Z — an assurance of light and of prayer, H — an 
outpouring of divine illumination, — a wish for death, I — hatred of 
life, K — flight from the body, A — an ambassador for the world, M — 
an importuner of God, N — fellow worshiper with the angels, S — a 
depth of knowledge, O — a dwelling place of mysteries, FT — a custodi- 
an of holy secrets, P — a savior of men, 1 — lord over the demons, T — 
master of the passions, Y — lord of the body, 4> — controller of nature, 
X — a stranger to sin, f — home of dispassion, il — with God's help an 
imitator of the Lord. 

We have to be particularly vigilant whenever the body is sick, for 
at such a time the demons, observing our weakness and our inability 
to fight against them as usual, rush in to attack us. In times of illness 
the demon of anger and even of blasphemy may be discovered around 



232 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



those who live in the world. Those leading a religious life but having 
alt they need of a material kind may suffer the onslaught of the de- 
mon of gluttony and fornication. But ascetics who live without com- 
forts may find themselves plagued by the tyrant of despondency and 
ingratitude. 

And I have noticed how the wolf of fornication increased the suf- 
ferings of the sick and, while they were laid low, caused stirrings of 
the flesh and even emissions. It was amazing to see how the body, for 
all its agonies, could still rage and lust. And when I looked once more 
I saw sick men comforted by the power of God or by the workings of 
compunction, and because they were comforted they kept the pain at 
bay and even arrived at a disposition where they had no wish to re- 
cover from their illness. At other times I saw men freed from their 
souls' passion by grave sickness, as though it were some kind of pen- 
ance, and I could only praise the God who cleans clay with clay. 

A mind disposed to the things of the spirit is certainly endowed 
with spiritual perception and this is something that, whether we pos- 
sess it or not, we should always seek to have. And when it comes, our 
senses desist from their natural activities. This is why a wise man 
once said, "You shall obtain a sense of what is divine.'"'^ 

In the matter of actions, words, thoughts, and movements, the 
monastic life has to be lived with a perceptive heart. '°° Otherwise it 
will not be monastic or indeed angelic. 

One has to distinguish between divine providence, divine assis- 
tance, divine protection, divine mercy, and divine consolation. Provi- 
dence is shown in all of nature, assistance among the faithful alone, 
protection among those believers whose faith is most alive, mercy 
among those who serve God, and consolation among those who love 
Him. 

One man's medicine can be another man's poison, and something 
can be a medicine to the same man at one time and a poison at an- 
other. So I have seen an incompetent physician who by inflicting dis- 
honor on a sick but contrite man produced despair in him, and I have 
seen a skillful physician who cut through an arrogant heart witli the 
knife of dishonor and thereby drained it of all its foul-smellin|j pns I 



W. It TM says lluil i\ Kiissi;iii imti- iittriliulcs ihi.s .Siivinj; In Si Ntlim ii( Sinm II i' , 
|)irsiiiM;ilily Niliis III" Aticyrn). 

UXI. riic .<^i'li(j|iust iidilM: "lirintiNc llii' iiKiiik iiui.si ciircliillv iii\tnU^<«to itll III* 
niiivcmcntK, even ilmse nC hio ihotiKJitii" (xi'holjon IH | HH(l|)|) 



iu 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



have seen a sick man striving to cleanse his impurity by drinking the 
medicine of obedience, by moving, walking, and staying awake. That 
same man when the eye of his soul was sick did not move, made no 
noise, and was silent. Therefore, "he who has ears to hear, let him 
hear" (Luke 14:35). 

Since I am not so proud as to pry into the gifts of God, I cannot 
say why it is that some people appear to be naturally inclined to tem- 
perance or silence or purity or modesty or meekness or contrition. 
Others have to fight hard against their own natures to acquire these, 
they have to force themselves on to the best of their ability, suffering 
occasional defeat on the way; and it seems to me that the very fact of 
having to struggle against their own natures somehow puts them into 
a higher category than the first kind. 

Never boast, man, about the wealth you acquired without having 
to work for it. The heavenly Giver anticipates how you may be in- 
jured, weakened, or ruined and therefore gives you some help by way 
of those gifts, which you certainly did not deserve. 

What we learned as children, our education and our studies, may 
be a help or a hindrance to us in virtue in monastic life, when we 
come of age. 

Angels are a light for monks and the monastic life is a light for all 
men. Hence monks should spare no effort to become a shining exam- 
ple in all things, and they should give no scandal in anything they say 
or do. For if the light becomes dark, then all the deeper will be the 
darkness of those living in the world. 

And if you will lend a willing ear to what I have to say, you will 
agree that it would be bad for us to spread ourselves too thinly, to 
have our wretched souls pulled in all directions, to take on, alone, a 
fight against thousands upon thousands and ten thousands upon ten 
thousands of enemies, since the understanding of their evil workings, 
indeed even the listing of them, is far beyond our capacities. Instead, 
let us summon the Holy Trinity to help us as we marshal three 
against three. ^°' If we fail to do this we will make very hard work for 
ourselves. For if God really dwells in us, the God Who made dry land 
of the sea, then the Israel within us, the mind that looks to God, will 
surely make a safe crossing of this sea and it will look on the Egyp- 



101. Seif-control, love and humility, says the scholia.st, against sensuality, avarice 
anrf arnbition (scholion 29 [1044AB]): the three latter are the principal evil thoughi.s ac- 
cording to Evagrius (see note 'H, p. 32^). 



2.14 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



tians sunk in the waters of tears. But if God has not yet arrived in us, 
who will understand the roaring waves of the sea, that is, of our bod- 
ies? Whereas if, because of our works, God rises within us. His ene- 
mies will be scattered; and if we draw near to Him through 
contemplation, "those who hate Him will run from before His face" 
(Ps. 67:2) and from ours. 

Let us seek to discover the things of heaven through the sweat of 
our efforts, rather than by mere talk, for at the hour of death it is 
deeds, not words, that must be displayed. 

Those who learn of treasure hidden away somewhere look for it, 
and when they find it, they make sure to hold on to what they have 
found. But those who get rich without any effort are quick to squan- 
der what they have. 

It is hard to shake off old habits, especially bad ones; and when 
others are added to these, despair can result and obedience proves to 
be without value. Still, I know that God. can do anything, that for 
Him nothing is impossible. 

Certain people put a particular question to me, a question very 
difficult to solve and certainly beyond my capacities. Nor is it dealt 
with in any of the books that have come my way. The question took 
this form: "What are the special offspring of the eight deadly sins, 
and which of the three chief sins produce the other five?" To my 
credit, I pleaded ignorance and was therefore put in the position of 
being able to learn the following from those men of great holiness: 
"Gluttony is the mother of lust and vainglory is the mother of de- 
spondency. Dejection and anger are the offspring of those three, '°-^ 
and the mother of pride is vainglory." 

The statement of these ever-memorable fathers inspired me to 
put more questions regarding the lineage of the eight sins, which pro- 
duced which. And these men, free as they were from passion, kindly 
instructed me, saying that no order or reason can be found among the 
irrational passions, that indeed every brand of disorder and chaos 
may be discovered in them. The blessed Fathers confirmed all this 
with persuasive examples and numerous proofs, some of which I in- 
clude in this section. They will be a light by which to anaty/c 'lie 
others. 



102. I.e. (in the r".va((rinii schriiic) of gliillony, vainglory ami avji i( i- lliil ( 'lltH<l4'llt 
does no! in fact inciilioti iiviiritc it) ll>c [ircsenl ]>assage, jltlunnjli he (ri'uil II ■!• <im <it 
the ihriT chief vices In Step 17. 



2J5 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



For instance, jokes at the wrong time can be the product of lust, 
or of vainglory when a man impiously pretends to be pious, or high 
living. Excessive sleep can arise from luxury, from fasting when those 
who fast become proud of it, from despondency, or sometimes from 
nature. Garrulity sometimes comes from gluttony, and sometimes 
from vainglory. Despondency can derive now from high living, now 
from lack of fear of God. Blasphemy is properly the child of pride, 
but can often arise out of the readiness to condemn one's neighbor for 
the same offense, or it can be due to the untimely envy of demons. 
Hardheartedness is sometimes the consequence of gluttony, frequent- 
ly of insensitivity, and also of being grasping. And to be grasping can 
be due to lust, avarice, gluttony, vainglory, and indeed to many other 
causes. Malice comes from conceit and from anger, while hypocrisy 
comes from independence and self-direction. 

The virtues opposed to these are born of opposing parents. And 
since I have not the time to examine them in detail, I will merely ob- 
serve that the remedy for all the passions listed above is humility. 
Those who possess that virtue have won the whole battle. 

The mother of all wickedness is pleasure and malice. If these are 
in a man, he will not see the Lord; and to abstain from the first with- 
out also giving up the second will not be of much use. 

The fear we have in the presence of rulers and of wild beasts 
could serve as an example of fear of the Lord, and physical love can be 
a paradigm of the longing for God. (There is nothing wrong with us- 
ing opposites for the purposes of finding examples of the virtues.) 

This present generation is wretchedly corrupt. It is full of pride 
and hypocrisy. It works as hard as the Fathers of old, but it has none 
of their graces. And yet there has been no era so much in need of 
spiritual gifts as today. Still, we got what we deserved, since God is 
made manifest not in labors but in simplicity and in humility. If the 
power of the Lord is brought to perfection in weakness, the Lord will 
definitely not reject a humble worker. 

If we happen to observe that one of our spiritual athletes is seri- 
ously ill, we must not maliciously try to discover the reason for his 
illness. Simply and lovingly we should do what we can to heal him as 
though he were a part of our own body and because he is a fellow 
campaigner hurt in battle. 

Illness can occur sometimes to cleanse us from our sins and 
sometimes to humble our thinking. When our ever-gracious Master 



2.16 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



and Lord discovers people getting lazy in their religious lives. He 
may humble their bodies by illness, as if by a lighter form of asceti- 
cism. Illness too can sometimes purify the soul from evil thoughts and 
passions. 

Whatever happens to us, whether seen or unseen, can be accept- 
ed by us well, or passionately, or in some intermediate fashion. I once 
saw three brothers punished. One was angry, one did not feel any 
grief, but the third profited greatly from the fact that he rejoiced in 
his punishment. 

I have watched farmers sowing the same type of seed, and yet 
each one had different ideas of what he was doing. One was planning 
to pay off his debts. Another was hoping to get rich. Another wanted 
to be able to bring gifts to honor the Lord. Another was hoping to 
earn praise for his work from the passers-by in life. Someone else 
wanted to irritate a jealous neighbor, while there was yet another 
who did not want to be reproached by men for laziness. And as for 
the seeds thrown into the earth, their names are fasting, keeping vigil, 
almsgiving, service, and suchlike. So let our brethren in the Lord 
keep a careful eye on their motives. 

When we draw water from a well, it can happen that we inadver- 
tently also bring up a frog. When we acquire virtues we can some- 
times find ourselves involved with the vices which are imperceptibly 
interwoven with them. What I mean is this. Gluttony can be caught 
up with hospitality; lust with love; cunning with discernment; malice 
with prudence; duplicity, procrastination, slovenliness, stubbornness, 
wilfulness, and disobedience with meekness; refusal to learn with si- 
lence; conceit with joy; laziness with hope; nasty condemnation with 
love again; despondency and indolence with tranquillity; sarcasm 
with chastity; familiarity with lowliness, And behind all the virtues 
follows vainglory as a salve, or rather a poison, for everything. 

We must not become upset if for a while the Lord seems to allow 
our requests to go unheard. Naturally the Lord would be delighted if 
in one moment all men became disspasionate. But He knows, in I lis 
providence, that this would not be to their advantage. 

When requests are made to God and are not immediately an- 
swered, the reason may be one of the following: either that I he pcli« 
ti(m is [iremauire, or because it has been made unvvorilidv or 
vaitigloriously, or liecause, if granled, it would lead to ciiiucit, or ba« 
CiUise rtegligoiu-f luul ciireioNsncss would resutl. 



aJ7 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



Demons and passions quit the soul entirely or for some length of 
time. No one can deny that. However, the reasons for such a depar- 
ture are known to very few. 

Some of the faithful and even of the unfaithful have found them- 
selves in the position of being bereft of all passions except one, and 
that one proved so overwhelming an evil that it took the place of all 
the others and was so devastating that it could lead to damnation. 

The material of the passions is done away with when consumed 
by divine fire. It is uprooted, and all evil urges retire from the soul 
unless the man attracts them back again by his worldly habits and by 
his laziness. 

Demons leave us alone so as to make us careless, then pounce on 
our miserable souls. And those beasts have another trick, of which I 
am aware; namely, to depart when the soul has become thoroughly 
imbued with the habits of evil, when it has turned into its own be- 
trayer and enemy. It is rather like what happens to infants weaned 
from the mother's breast, who suck their fingers because the habit has 
taken hold of them. 

There is a fifth kind of dispassion. It comes from great simplicity 
and from admirable innocence. "To such is help rightly given by the 
God Who saves the upright of heart" (Ps. 7;11) and Who rids them of 
all evil without their perceiving it. They are like infants who when 
undressed have no realization of the fact that they are naked. 

Evil or passion is not something naturally implanted in things. 
God is not the creator of passions. On the other hand, there are many 
natural virtues that have come to us from Him. These clearly include 
the following: mercy, something even the pagans have; love, for even 
dumb animals bewail the loss of one of their own; faith, which all of 
us can generate of ourselves; hope, since we all lend, and take to the 
sea, and sow seed, expecting to do well out of it. Hence if love comes 
naturally to us — and it has been shown to be so — if it is the bond and 
the fulfilment of the law, virtues cannot be too far from nature. For 
which reason, those who claim to be unable to practice the virtues 
should be very ashamed of themselves. 

At a level above nature are chastity, freedom from anger, humil- 
ity, prayer, keeping vigil, fasting, uninterrupted compunction, and 
we learn about these from men, from angels, and from the Teacher 
and Giver, God the Word. 

When confronted by evils, we should choose the least. For in- 



2. IK 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



stance, we are standing at prayer and some brothers approach us. We 
have to do one of two things, either to cease praying or to upset a 
brother by ignoring him. Now love is greater than prayer, since the 
latter is a particular virtue while the former embraces all virtues. 

Long ago, in my young days, I came to a city or to a village, and 
while sitting at table I was afflicted at the same time by thoughts of 
gluttony and of vainglory. Knowing and fearing the outcome of glut- 
tony, I decided to give in to vainglory. I also knew that in the young, 
the demon of gluttony often overcomes the demon of vainglory. This 
is not to be wondered at, for among people of the world love of mon- 
ey is the root of all evil, whereas in monks it is gluttony. 

God in His providence often leaves some vestiges of passion in 
people of a very spiritual disposition. He does so in order that, by 
their endless condemnation of what are very minor defects, they may 
obtain a wealth of humility that no one can plunder. 

Humility can come only when you have learned to practice obe- 
dience. When a man has a self-taught skill, he may start having high 
notions about himself. ' 

The Fathers say that two virtues dominate the active life, name- 
ly, fasting and obedience. They are quite right about this, since fast- 
ing destroys sensuality and obedience completes the destruction by 
bringing in humility. Mourning too has a double effect by destroying 
sin and producing humility. 

A pious man tends to give to anyone who asks. Someone more 
than usually pious gives even to those who do not ask. But to omit the 
opportunity to demand the return of .something from the person who 
took it is characteristic, I think, only of the dispassionate. 

Regarding every vice and every virtue, we must unceasingly 
scrutinize ourselves to see what point we have reached, a beginning, a 
middle, or the end. 

Attacks by demons afflict us for three reasons: because we are 
sensual, because we are proud, or because the demons envy us. The 
last is a ground for rejoicing, the middle for pity, and where the first 
is concerned, the prospect is lifelong failure. 

Endurance of hardship is a kind of perception or habit. I he riiiin 
who has it will never he afraid of pain, or toil or hardship, nor u ill lio 
run from them. It was this marvelous grace that cnabUil ilir s<)n1'. of 
the martyrs to rise superior to their lormenis. 

Keeping guiutl over oiie'.s thoughts is one thing; Wtllcltlrig iiV«r 



21V 



JOHN CUMACUS 



one's mind another. Distant from each other as the east from the 
west, the latter is more significant and more laborious than the for- 
mer. 

It is one thing to pray for rescue from bad thoughts, another to 
stand up agamst them, and another still to despise and ignore them 
The first situation is exemplified by the one who said: "O God come 
and help me*' (Ps. 69:2); the second by, "I will speak a word of contra- 
diction to those who reproach me" (Ps. 118:42), and "You have made 
us a contradiction to our neighbors" (Ps. 79:7). And of the third the 
witness IS the psalmist: "I was silent and did not open my mouth, I 
put a guard on my mouth when the sinner was before me" (Ps. 38' 10)- 
"The proud have gone too far in breaking the law, but I have not 
turned aside from my contemplation of You" (Ps. 1 18:51). So the man 
who stands in the middle position will often make use of the first of 
these, since he is insufficiently prepared, whereas the man who is still 
at the first stage cannot use the second method as a way of overcom- 
ing his enemies. However, the man who has come as far as the third 
step will completely ignore the demons. 

The incorporeal cannot be hemmed in by what is corporeal; but 
the man who has God for his possession can do anything at all. 

Everyone with a healthy sense of smell can detect hidden per- 
fumes, and a pure soul can quickly recognize in others the sheer fra- 
grance of goodness that he himself has received from God. And 
indeed he can also recognize— as others cannot— the foul odor from 
which he himself has been liberated. 

Not everyone can achieve dispassion. But all can be saved and 
can be reconciled to God. 

Have a care that alien thoughts may not secure a hold over you. I 
mean those that push you into being anxious to probe either the un- 
speakable decisions of God's providence or those visions that by com- 
ing to others give rise to the notion that the Lord shows favoritism. 
Such thoughts are the manifest outcome of pride. 

There is a demon of avarice that often takes on the guise of hu- 
mility. I here are demons of vainglory and of sensuality and these en- 
courage the giving of alms. If we can keep ourselves clear of these, we 
ought to do the works of mercy without cease. 

Some hold that demons work against each other. But I do know 
that all of them work to destroy us. 

Our own determination and intention together with the help of 
God come into play in every spiritual act of ours, visible or not, and 



240 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



the latter is unlikely to operate without the former. 

Ecclesiastes declares that there is a time for everything under 
heaven (cf Eccles. 3:1), and "everything" may be taken to refer to our 
spiritual life. If this is so, then we ought to examine the matter; and 
we should do everything in proper season. For those entering the 
struggle — I mean novices — there is a time for dispassion and a time 
for passion. There is a time for tears and a time for hardness of heart, 
a time for obedience and a time for command, a time for fasting and a 
time for eating, a time for the battle against the body our enemy and a 
time for quiet in our flesh. There is a time for the soul's upheaval and 
a time for calm in the mind, a time for heart's sorrow and a time for 
joy of spirit, a time for teaching and a time for listening, a time for 
pollutions, perhaps on account of conceit, and a time for cleansing by 
humility, a time for effort and a time for secure rest, a time for still- 
ness and a time for undistracted distraction, a time for unceasing 
prayer and a time for honest service. Proud zeal must therefore never 
be allowed to deceive us and we should never strain for what will 
come in its own good time, since winter is<not the time for summer's 
goods nor seedtime the proper season for the harvest. There is a time 
for the sowing of labors and a time to reap the astounding fruits of 
grace; and if it were otherwise we would not receive in due time 
whatever was proper to the season. 

God in His unspeakable providence has arranged that some re- 
ceived the holy reward of their toils even before they set to work, oth- 
ers while actually working, others again when the work was done, 
and still others at the time of their death. Let the reader ask himself 
which one of them was made more humble. 

There is a despair that results from the great number of one's 
sins. It comes from a burdened conscience and intolerable grief, when 
the soul, engulfed by the mass and the burden of its wounds, slips 
into the deep waters of hopelessness. But there is also another kind of 
sorrow. It comes from pride and conceit and arises when a man 
thinks it unfair that he lapsed in some way. Now there is a distinctive 
aspect to each of these conditions which the observant will discover. 
The one man gives himself over to indifference, the other coniiiiue.H 
to practice his ascetic disciplines even though his despair ]>cr>iiNis in 
him, which is ;) (•(iMir;i<liciion. Temperance and good hone ctm lu*iil 
the first man; the oilier will Ik- cured by humility ntul by tlip |irMr(ii<' 
of judging no one, 

W'f sliould he iifillier mtia/ed nor shocked when Wf litlil oil! 



J4I 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



selves watching someone do evil behind a cloak of fine words. After 
all, it was overweening pride that destroyed the serpent in Paradise. 

Whatever you do, however you live, whether you live under obe- 
dience or whether you are independent, in what you do openly or in 
your spiritual life, let it be your rule and practice to ask if what you 
do is in accordance with the will of God. When we novices, for in- 
stance, do something and the humility deriving from that action is 
not added to the possessions of our souls, then the action, great or 
small, has not been undertaken in deference to the divine will. For 
those of us who are untried recruits in the life of the spirit, growth in 
humility comes out of doing what the Lord wants; for those who have 
reached midway along that route, the test is an end to inner conflict; 
and for the perfect there is increase and, indeed, a wealth of divine 
light. 

The tiniest thing may not seem so to the great. But to those who 
are small, even great things are not quite perfect. 

The sun is bright when clouds have left the air; and a soul, freed 
of its old habits and also forgiven, has surely seen the divine light. 

Distinctions have to be made between sin, idleness, indifference, 
passion, and a lapse. The man who can analyze such matters, with 
God's help, should do so. 

Some people are full of praise for the gift of miracle working and 
for those other spiritual gifts that can be seen. What they do not know 
is that there are many more important gifts and that these are hidden 
and are therefore secure. 

A perfectly purified man can look into the soul of his neighbor — 
not of course into its actual substance — and can discern its present 
state. He who progresses further can even tell the state of the soul 
from the body. 

A small fire can wipe out an entire forest and a small fault can 
ruin all our work. 

There comes a breathing space from hostility when the powers 
of the mind are awakened without stirring the fire of passion. There 
is too an exhaustion of the body that can actually evoke the flesh's 
lust. So "we shall put no trust in ourselves" (2 Cor. 1:9). We ought, 
rather, to depend on God, Who in His own secret way can mortify 
our living lusts. 

If it comes to our attention that there are some who love us in the 
Lord, we must be very careful to keep our distance from them, since 
nothing can so damage love and produce hatred as familiarity. 



242 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



The eye of the soul is spiritual and very beautiful and next to in- 
corporeal beings it surpasses everything. And so it happens that peo- 
ple who are still subject to the effects of the passions can frequently 
tell what the thoughts are of others because of their great love for 
them. This is particularly true of those who have not been over- 
whelmed by the defilements of the flesh. For there is nothing so di- 
rectly opposed to immaterial nature as material nature. Let him who 
reads understand. 

For laymen, superstitious observances are contrary to God's 
providence. But for monks they are contrary to spiritual knowledge. 

Faltering souls should recognize the visitation of the Lord from 
their bodily circumstances and dangers and outward temptations. 
The perfect should recognize it from the coming of the Holy Spirit 
and the acquisition of graces. 

There is a demon who attacks us when we are lying in bed. He 
fires evil and dirty thoughts at us, so that, too lazy to get up and arm 
ourselves against him with prayer, we might fall asleep with all these 
dirty thoughts in us and have dirty dreams.' 

There is a demon called the forerunner. He lays hold of us as 
soon as we awaken and defiles our very first thought. 

Give the first fruits of your day to the Lord, for it will determine 
the rest of the day. An excellent servant of the Lord once said to me 
something well worth hearing. "I can tell from my morning how the 
rest of the day will go." 

There are many roads to holiness — and to hell. A path wrong for 
one will suit another, yet what each is doing is pleasing to God. 

Demons, using the temptations that occur to us, fight to make us 
say or do something improper. If they cannot get at us in this way, 
they turn quiet and whisper to us that we should offer up arrogant 
thanks to God. 

Those with minds centered on the things of heaven, after the sep- 
aration of soul and body rise up on high in two parts. '°^ Those with 
minds directed to what is below will travel that downward route, for 
there is no intermediate halting place for souls separated from their 
bodies, Only one of God's creations has its being in something else 
and not in itself.'"* Yet it is amazing how it can come to exist nuiside 
that in which it received bciiiy. 



11)!. i.e., firit thf soul uml llicn, nflflf th« resnrrfction. ilir titulv 
104. I.e., llir uiiil Itiik it« lii'iii|j iM llwbCKly< 



'H 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



Pious mothers bear pious daughters, and the mothers themselves 
are born of the Lord. And it makes good sense to apply this norm in 
reverse. 

The coward should not go out to battle. This was the injunction 
of Moses, or rather of God Himself (cf. Deut. 20:8), and the reason, a 
good one, was in case the last spiritual lapse should be worse than the 
first fall of the body. 

Our eyes are a light to all the body. Discernment of the virtues is 
a light to all the mind. 

On Expert Discernment 

As the hart parched with thirst pants for running water (cf. Ps. 
41:2), the monk longs for a knowledge or grasp of the good and divine 
will. And indeed he longs also for knowledge of what is not totally of 
God, even of what is opposed to God. There is here a vitally impor- 
tant theme, and one not easily explained. What I mean is this. What 
should we do at once, with no delay and as soon as possible, as is rec- 
ommended in the saying, "Woe to him who delays from day to day" 
(Ecclus. 5:7-8) and from period to period? On the other hand, what 
should be done moderately and with discretion, in accordance with 
the saying, "War is made by leadership" (Prov. 20:18) and "Let all 
things be done decently and in due order" (1 Cor. 14:40)? Not every- 
one can make quick and precise decisions in such delicate matters and 
even that man who had God within him and the Holy Spirit speaking 
for him, even he prays for this gift and says: "Teach me to do Your 
will, since You are my God" (Ps. 142:10), and "Direct me to your 
truth" (Ps. 24:5), and "Show me. Lord, the road I must travel, for 1 
have lifted up my soul to You" (Ps. 142:8) from all the cares and pas- 
sions of this life. 

Those who wish to di.scover the will of God must begin by morti- 
fying their own will. Then having prayed in faith and simplicity, all 
malice spent, they should turn humbly and in confidence to the fa- 
thers or even the brothers and they should accept their counsel, as 
though from God Himself, even when that counsel goes against the 
grain, even when the advice comes from those who do not seem very 
spiritual. God, after all, is not unjust. He will not lead astray the souls 
who, trusting and guileless, yield in lowliness to the advice and deci- 
sion of their neighbor. Even if those consulted are stupid, God imma- 
terially and invisibly speaks through them and anyone who faithfully 
submits to this norm will be filled with humility. If a man can ex- 



244 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



press on a harp whatever ails him, surely a rational mind and a rea- 
sonable soul can provide better teaching than something inanimate. 

Yet this perfect and easy rule is rejected by many for reasons of 
pride. Instead they have sought to discover the will of God by their 
own resources and within themselves and have then proceeded to of- 
fer us numerous and different opinions on this whole issue. 

Some of those trying to discover the will of God abandoned ev- 
ery attachment. They asked God to be the arbiter of any thoughts 
they might have concerning the stirrings of their souls, whether to do 
something or to resist it. They prayed hard for a fixed number of days 
and they laid aside any inclination of their own. In this way they 
found out what God willed, either through some direct manner of in- 
telligible communication from Him or by the complete evaporation 
from their souls of whatever it was they had proposed to do. 

Others found so much trouble and distraction in whatever they 
were doing that they were led to think that bother of this sort could 
only have come from God, in accordance with the saying, "We want- 
ed to come to you once and once again, 6ut Satan prevented us" (1 
Thess. 2:18). 

But there were others who found that a venture of theirs had 
proved unexpectedly successful, and so they inferred that it had 
pleased God, and they went on to declare that God helps everyone 
who chooses to do the right thing (cf. Rom. 8:28). 

The man who through illumination has come to possess God 
within himself both in things requiring immediate action and in 
those that take time will find immediate divine reassurance by the 
second way. 

Wavering judgment and lingering doubt are the signs of an un- 
enlightened and vainglorious soul. 

God is not unjust. He will not slam the door against the man 
who humbly knocks, 

In everything we do, in what has to be done now or later, the ob- 
jective must be sought from God Himself; and every act that is not 
the product of personal inclination or of impurity will be imputed to 
us for good, especially if done for the sake of God and noi for sumc- 
one else. This is so, even if the actions themselves are not compielcly 
good. 

There is always :t danger in seeking for whm is l)c'vi»(nl onr jtn* 
modiale reach, ;uid whm (ioil lins decided for us is hard lo pi-iu-li'iltC> 
In His providence, He often coiueals His wilt from iiN, for \h Itliuwil 



i4S 



JOHNCIJMACUS 



that even if wc kiic-w ^il.mit it, wc would disobey it, thereby rendering 
ourselves lial)lc to grt-ntir [xiiiishinent. 

An honest heart is utishnkoi by the various sorts of distraction It 
sails along safely in tlu- ship of innocence. 

There are brave souls who iovin^rly and humbly undertake tasks 
that are well beyond thcin. i lu-re are proud hearts that do the same. 
Now It often happens that our enemies deliberately inspire us to do 
things beyond our capacities, and their objective is to make us falter 
so that we abandon even what lies within our power, and make our- 
selves ridiculous to our enemies. 

I have observed men who were sick in soul and body and who 
out of a sense of the great number of their sins, tried to do what was 
beyond their power, and therefore failed. To these I say that God 
judges our repentance not by our exertions but by our humility. 

Sometimes one's upbringing may be respons'ible for the greatest 
evils. Sometimes it may be the company we keep. And often it may be 
the sheer perversity of the soul that produces disaster. The monk who 
IS free of the first two may escape the third as well. But the man af- 
flicted by the third is discredited everywhere, for there is no place 
safer than heaven. '°5 

In any conflict with unbelievers or heretics, we should stop after 
we have twice reproved them (cf. Titus 3:10). But where we are deal- 
mg with those who are eager to learn the truth, we should never 
grow tired of doing the right thing (cf. Gal. 6:9). And we should use 
both situations to test our own steadfastness. 

A man who despairs of himself after hearing about the supernat- 
ural achievements of the saints is very unreasonable. In fact they 
should teach you one of two things, either to be courageous like them 
in the striving for excellence, or else to be deeply humble and con- 
scious of your inherent weakness by way of thrice-holy humility. 

Some of the impure demons are worse than others. They tell us 
not to sin alone but to bring company with us, and thev tell us this in 
order that our punishment may be all the more severe. 1 have wit- 
nessed the case of someone who learned a sinful habit from another. 
1 he latter came to his senses, repented, and desisted from evil, but his 
change of heart was of no use because of what his disciple was doing. 
The wickedness of the evil spirits is truly astounding and i^ is 
something not witnes.sed by many, and indeed even those few who 



10.^. Yet Satan tell from heaven. 



246 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



appreciate it see it only in part. How is it, for instance, that when wc 
are living in luxury and abundance we can keep vigil and remain 
awake, whereas while fasting and wearing ourselves down with toil, 
we are wretchedly overcome by sleep? Why is it that our hearts grow 
calloused when we are dwelling alone in silence, and yet compunc- 
tion may be stirred in us when we are involved with others? How is it 
that dreams tempt us when we are hungry and omit to do so when we 
are full? Amid want we become gloomy and incapable of compunc- 
tion, while after some wine we grow happy and are quite able to be 
contrite. {Anyone who, with God's help, can shed light on this ought 
to do so, for the sake of the unenlightened. For we really are unillu- 
minated where all this is concerned.) But switches of this sort, of 
course, do not always come from demons. In my own case — and for 
reasons I do not understand — I too experience this kind of change as a 
result of the temperament which I have been given and my burden of 
grubby and greedy flesh. 

Regarding these changes mentioned above, changes that are so 
hard to explain, let us sincerely and humbly pray to the Lord. But if 
after time and prayer we still experience the same force at work in us, 
we should accept that this is due to nature and not to demons. And 
divine providence often likes to help us by means of adversity and to 
restrain our pride in every way. 

It is a hardy enterprise to inquire into the depths of God's judg- 
ment, for the inquisitive sail in the ship of conceit. ^°^ 

Someone asked this question of a discerning man: "Why is it that 
Ciod confers gifts and wonder-working powers on some, even though 
He knows in advance that they will lapse?" His answer was that God 
does this so that other spiritual men may grow cautious, and to show 
that the human will is free, and to demonstrate that on the day of 
judgment there will be no excuse for these who lapsed. 

The Law, in its imperfection, says: "Attend to yourself" (Deut. 
4:^). The Lord, in His perfection, tells us to correct our brother, say- 
ing, "If your brother sins against you, etc." (Matt. 1S:15). If your re- 
proof, or rather your reminder, can be pure and humble, then ilo as 
the Lord cominandcd, particularly in the case of those who will nc 
ccpi it, But if your progress has not reached this far, ai Iciisi ilo witttt 
I he I .aw says. ^ 



10^. M IM ;i(IiIm "Vi'I lH'1'uii.iir iil thr wrnkncK.s iil iiuiny, tinnptliHtg ultiiilltl In 



Nil ill " 



247 



"^'^"' 



jOIINCLIMACUS 



Y,H, should MO, |,c surprised if those you love turn against you 
.fter you have rcl,ul..| „...„. Tl.c- frivolous are instrumentfof theT 
mons and aro used, espceially against the demons' enem.es 

.s t that when we have Ahu,gh,y Ciod, the angels, and the saints to 
help us toward virtue, and when only the devifis against u s we t H 
nchne so read.ly to the pass.ons= I do not want to go .nto detail on 
h.s. In fact cannot. And ,f everything that has come .nto being on" 
inues to hold onto ,ts nature, how is .t. as the great Gregory puts" 
hat I am the ,mage of God, yet mingled w.ch ciayP-v j,^, ^'l^^^ 

continuously try to return to its original cond.tion? Indeed everyone 
should struggle to raise his clay, so to speak, to a place on the thZe 

and the do r "" ^x "1' "'"" ^° "^^'^ "^'^ -«"^' ^-^ ^^e way 
and the door he open. 7 o hear about the achievements of the spiritual 
l^athers stirs mmd and soul to imitation '"s ^ 

tr.v.?"'"''"^/''''""^- '° *' ' ''^^' '" '^''^'''''^ ' ™d home to the lost 
erer ot health, a destroyer of sickness. 

Those who look with admirat.on on trifles do so for two reasons^ 
either through profound ignorance or else because they make much 
hu^X ""'''°" ^'^'■^^^ '^ ^-^^^ ^^^-^ '-^--'-s maj ZTl 

on r!^' '^"['^ r 'P"" ^''^ ^'"^^"^' ^'^ 'Should make outright war 
on them. In the f.rst case a fall is sometimes given or taken, but in the 
latter case the enemy is always under fierce attack 

The man who has conquered the passions has injured the de- 
mons, and by pretending to be st.ll subject to them he deceives h s 

d.sgrace but n his heart he was untroubled by it and .n his mind he 
was prayerful However, he lamented aloud and by feigned passion 
hid h,s dispassion. Another pretended to be eager for the job of fatTer 
upenor when m fact he had no wish at all for it. And iow am I o 
.peak of the chastity of the brother who entered a brothel for whit 



108. HTM ha. a longer version of th,s sentence: "It excites the mind ,nd mhiI lo 
emuhfon to he.r the .pir.tud feats of the Fathers, and their ..e..h.u, ad,,,, rs 
<o imitate them through Ifstening to their teaching." 



24K 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



appeared as a determination to commit sin, and who actually enticed 
the harlot to take up the ascetic life?^"'' Or, again, it once happened 
that a bunch of grapes was brought early one morning to an ascetic. 
When the person who brought the grapes had left, the hermit ate 
them, seeming to stuff them in, but in fact taking no pleasure in 
them, and in this way he fooled the demons into imagining that he 
was a glutton. Another one of the brethren once lost a few palm 
leaves' 1° and he pretended all day to be very upset about this. 

However, people like this should be wary. In their efforts to fool 
the demons they may fool themselves. It was to these that the refer- 
ence was made: "As deceivers and yet true" (2 Cor. 6:8). 

If anyone wishes to present to the Lord a pure body and a clean 
heart, he must persevere in freedom from anger and in chastity. All 
our work is useless if we lack these. 

Eyes show different colors and the sun of the spirit may shine in 
different ways in the soul. There is the way of bodily tears and there 
is the way of the tears of the soul. There is the way of the contempla- 
tion of what is before us and the way of the contemplation of what 
remains unseen. There is the way of things heard at second hand and 
the way of spontaneous joy within the soul. There is the way of still- 
ness and the way of obedience. And in addition to these there is the 
way of rapture, the way of the mind mysteriously and marvelously 
carried into the light of Christ. 

There are virtues, and there are begetters of virtues, and it is 
with these latter that a wise man would have his deaHngs. The teach- 
er of these parent virtues is God Himself in His proper activity, and 
there are plenty of teachers for the derivative virtues. 

We should be careful not to make up for lack of food by sleeping 
too much, and vice versa. This is a practice of foolish men. I have seen 
a.scetics who, having yielded a little to their appetites, afterwards pun- 
ished their poor stomachs by standing all night, thus teaching them m 
be content if they were not filled up. 

The demon of avarice fights hard against those who have noth 
ing. When it fails to overcome them, it begins to tell them about (he 
wretched conditie)ns of the poor, thereby inducing those in the rcli- 
giou.s life to become concerned once more with material ihinn.t, 



Id';. Hunijviiii) ihc Siiiilnnitri wp Iv Nmi, "Histoin- de I liiii*", lnnrilr> dii UMlm 
(iuimet v\«, f,. <l 

III) Si-i- lliiU' :H, || IIH. 



a4v 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



When you are depressed, bear in mind the Lord's command to 
Feter to forgive a sinner seventy times seven (cf. Matt. 18-22) And 
you may be sure that He Who gave this command to another will 
Himself do very much more. But if, on the other hand, we become 
too self-assured, let us remember what has been said about the person 
who keeps the whole spiritual law and yet, having slipped into one 
passion, that of pride, is guilty of all (cf. James 2:10). 

Some evil and jealous spirits of their own accord leave holy men 
so as to deprive these of the opportunity to win the prize of victory 
over them, ' 

Blessed are the peacemakers (Matt. 5:9). No one will deny this 
But I have seen foemakers who are also blessed. Two monks once de- 
veloped an unhealthy fondness for one another. But a discerning and 
very experienced father brought them to the stage of detesting each 
other. He made them enemies by telling each man he was being slan- 
dered by the other, and by this piece of chicanery he warded off the 
demon s malice, and by causing hatred he brought an end to what 
was an unclean affection. 

Again, there are some who infringe a commandment for the sake 
of a commandment. I have known young men who were bound by 
ties of honorable affection but who, to avoid any scandal, agreed to 
avoid each other's company for a time. 

Like a wedding and a funeral, pride and despair are opposites 
liut sufficient confusion can be caused by demons to make them seem 
01 a kind. 

When we begin religious life, some unclean demons give us les- 
sons in the interpretation of scripture. This happens particularly in 
the case of people who are either vainglorious or who have had a secu- 
kr education, and these are gradually led into heresy and blasphemv 
One may detect this diabolical teaching about God, or rather war 
against God, by the upheaval, confusion, and unholy joy in the soul 
during lessons. 

The things that have come into being have received from the 
Creator their proper place, their beginning and, in some cases, their 
end. But there is no boundary to virtue. The psalmist says "I have 
seen the end of all perfection, but Your commandment is Very broad 
and IS without limit" (Ps. 1 18:96). Now if it is true that some good as- 
cetics pass from the strength of action to the strength of ctmrcmnla- 
tjon (cf. Ps. 83:7), and if it is true that love never fails (i Cor 1 ^H) uut 



250 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



that the Lord will guard the coming in of your fear and the going out 
of your love (cf. Ps. 120:8), then love has no boundary, and both in the 
present and in the future age we will never cease to progress in it, as 
we add light to light. Perhaps this may seem strange to many. Never- 
theless it has to be said, and the evidence we have, blessed Father, 
would lead me to say that even the angels make progress and indeed 
that they add glory to glory and knowledge to knowledge. 

Do not be surprised if demons often inspire good thoughts in us, 
together with the reasoned arguments against them. What these ene- 
mies of ours are trying to do is to get us to believe that they know 
even our innermost thoughts. 

Do not be a harsh critic of those who resort to eloquence to teach 
many important things, but who have few actions to match their 
words. For edifying words have often compensated for a lack of 
deeds. All of us do not get an equal share of every good, and for some 
the word is mightier than the deed (cf. Ps. 102:20-21; 1 Pet. 5:8) and 
vice versa for others. 

, God neither caused nor created evil and, therefore, those who as- 

\ sert that certain passions come naturally to the soul are quite wrong. 

I What they fail to realize is that we have taken natural attributes of 
our own and turned them into passions. For instance, the seed which 
we have for the sake of procreating children is abused by us for the 
sake of fornication. Nature has provided us with anger as something 

I to be turned against the serpent, but we have used it against our 
neighbor. We have a natural urge to excel in virtue, but instead we 
compete in evil. Nature stirs within us the desire for glory, but that 
glory is of a heavenly kind. It is natural for us to be arrogant — against 
the demons. Joy is ours by nature, but it should be joy on account of 
the Lord and for the sake of doing good to our neighbor. Nature has 
given us resentment, but that ought to be against the enemies of our 
souls. We have a natural desire for food,''' but not surely for profli- 
g-icy. 

An active soul is a provocation to demons, yet the greater our 
conflicts the greater our rewards. There will be no crown for the iHiin 
who has never been under attack, and the man who perseveres in 
ipite of any failures will be glorified as a champion by ilie aiiKcl.*, 



Ill 1 1 IM I'cildN "plc«l*ii(<'" {l>tlth)\) t'lir "liiml" (trnpbis). 



<IM 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



He Who was three nights in the earth came back and lived forev- 
er. He who has conquered three hours will never die.^'^ 

If, after rising in us, the sun "knows his going down" (Ps. 103:19) 
for our providential chastening, "he made darkness the place of his 
concealment" (Ps. 17:12). The night came on, the night in which the 
fierce young lions go prowling once more after they had left us alone, 
the lions and all the beasts of the woods of thorny passions, roaring to 
seize the hope that is in us, and seeking from God their food of the 
passions either in thought or in deed. Through the darkness of our 
humility, the sun rises over us, and the wild beasts gather where they 
belong, in sensual hearts and not in ours (cf. Ps. 103:22). Then the de- 
mons speak to one another: "The Lord delighted in doing great 
things for them." And we speak: " 'He has done great things for us 
and we are glad' (cf. Ps. 135:4) but you are banished." "See, the Lord 
rides on a swift cloud," on the soul raised above earthly longings, 
"and He shall come into Egypt," into the darkened heart, "and He 
shall shatter the man-made idols" (Isa. 19:1), the empty fashionings of 
the mind. 

Christ, although all-powerful, fled bodily from Herod. So let the 
foolish learn not to fling themselves into temptation. It is said: "Let 
not your foot be moved and let not vour guardian angel slumber" (cf 
Ps. 120:3). 

Like bindweed round a cypress, vanity twines itself around cour- 
age. And we must be ever on guard against yielding to the mere 
thought that we have achieved any sort of good. We have to be really 
careful about this, in case it should be a trait within us, for if it is, 
then we have certainly failed. 

If we watch out continually for signs of the passions, we will dis- 
cover that there are many within us which, in our sickness, we never 
noticed. We were too weak, or they were too deeply rooted. 

God judges us by our intentions, but because of His love for us 



112. What is meant by "three hours" is obscure. Scholion 2Ia (1081A), quoting :i 
saying of Abba Elias, suggests that they are death, the coming into the presence of (;od, 
and judgment. Scholion 21b (1081A) offers other interpretations; youth, maturity ami 
old age, or pleasure, vainglory and avarice, or the three temptation.s of the dtiuon l]>re- 
sumably the three temptations of Christ in the wildernc.s.s). As the conqueror of ilu- 
three hours is Christ Himself, the expression could well refer iu ihe ihree hours on the 
cross. 



2.^2 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



He only demands from us such actions as lie within our power. Great 
is the man who does all that lies within his power, but greater still is 
the man who, in all humility, tries to do more. 

Demons often prevent us from doing what would be easy and 
valuable for us. Instead they like to push us into trying what is hard- 
er. 

I find that Joseph is deemed blessed because he avoided an occa- 
sion of sin and not because he showed evidence of dispassion (cf. Gen. 
39:12). Hence the question of the type and number of sins, the avoid- 
ance of which is rewarded by a crown. There is a difference between 
running from a shadow and the greater act of hastening toward the 
sun of righteousness. For to be in darkness is to stumble and to stum- 
ble is to fall, and to fall is to die. 

Those brought down by wine often wash with water, but those 
brought down by passion wash with their tears. 

There is a distinction between clouding, darkness, and blindness. 
Temperance will cure the first, solitude the second. The third will be 
cured by obedience and by the God Who fpr our sakes became obedi- 
ent (cf. Phil. 2:8). 

Two examples, drawn from the world, will provide useful analo- 
gies for those with minds intent on the things of heaven. A monastic 
community living according to the Lord is like a laundry where the 
dirt, grossness, and deformity of the soul are scrubbed away; and the 
solitary life for those who are moving from the monastery to total se- 
clusion is like the dye-works where lust, the harboring of wrongs, and 
anger are erased. 

Some would claim that our repeated lapses in some matter are 
caused by our failure to do adequate penance for earlier falls. But the 
problem then arises as to whether those who have not fallen into the 
same type of sin over and over again have actually repented as they 
should. People commit the same sin again and again either because 
they have thoroughly forgotten their previous sins, or because in 
their own pleasure-loving way they keep thinking that God is merci- 
ful, or because they have given up all hope of salvation. Now — and I 
may be severely criticized for this — it seems to me that their real diffi- 
culty is that they have not had the strength to grip firmly whai in (act 
i.s a dominating habit. 

Hero is a tincsiioii Why docs the incorporeal soul fail lo prrrcivo 
the real characicr o( (In- rvil spniis thai come lo dwell with it? Tttf 
answer, perhaps, lies in the union of the soul with ihc ImhIv, Imi It lli 



25.1 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



known only to the One Who bound them together in the first place. 
An experienced man once asked me earnestly to tell him which 
spirits were accustomed to depress the mind when we sin and which 
to exalt it. The question left me at a loss, and 1 had to swear my igno- 
rance. So this man, himself so eager for knowledge, taught me, say- 
ing: "I shall give you the leaven of discernment briefly and I shall 
leave you to find out the rest by your own efforts. The spirits of lust, 
of anger, of gluttony, of despondency, and of sleepiness do not usual- 
ly rai.se up the horn of the mind. But the spirits of money-grubbing, 
of ambition, of talkativeness, and many others pile evil onto evil. This 
also is the reason why the spirit of criticism is so near the latter." 

A monk who has spent an hour or a day visiting people out in the 
world or entertaining them as guests should rejoice at the time of 
parting, like someone released from a trap. If however what he feels is 
a pang of regret, then this shows that he has become the plaything 
either of vainglory or of lust. 

We must always find out which way the wind blows, lest we set 
our sails against it. 

Show kindness and give a little respite to old men leading the ac- 
tive life whose bodies are worn out by ascetical practice. But insist 
that young men who have exhausted their souls with sin must be re- 
strained and must think of the eternal torments. 

I have already said that at the beginning of one's life as a monk 
one cannot suddenly become free of gluttony and vainglory. But we 
must not counter vainglory with high living simply because among 
novices, to defeat gluttony is to run into vainglory. So let us fight it 
by way of frugality. The time will come— and indeed is already here 
for those really wishing it— when the Lord will enable us to trample 
on this vice. 

At the start of religious life, the young and those of advanced 
years are not troubled by the same passions, since very often thev 
have quite opposite failings. Hence the fact that humility is so truly 
blessed, for it makes repentance safe and effective for both young and 
old. 

Do not make a fuss about what I am going to say now. There are 
souls, true, upright, and rare, who know nothing of malice, hypocrisy 
and deceit, and who are quite unable to live in religious communities. 
Helped by a spiritual director, they can leave the harbor of solitude 
and rise heavenward without ever wishing for and experiencing ihe 
ups and downs, the stumbling blocks of community life. 



254 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN I 



Men can heal the lu.stful. Angels can heal the malicious. (July 
God can heal the proud. 

It may be that an aspect of love is to allow a neighbor who comes 
on frequent visits to do what he pleases. Certainly we must show him 
every kindness. 

Here is another problem. Is there a kind of repentance that can 
destroy good in the same way as evil? If so, how, to what extent, and 
in what circumstances? 

We must be very shrewd in the matter of knowing when to stand 
up against sin, when and to what extent to fight against whatever 
nourishes the passions, and when to withdraw from the struggle. Be- 
cause of our weakness there are times when we must choose flight if 
we are to avoid death. We must watch and see (for perhaps there are 
times when we can neutralize gall with bitterness) which of the de- 
mons uplift us, which depress us, which make us hard, which bring 
us consolation, which darken us, which pretend to enlighten us, 
which make us lazy, which shifty, which make us sad and which 
cheerful. , 

At the start of our religious lives, we may find that our passions 
are stronger than they were when we were in the world. This should 
not upset us, and if we remove the causes of our sickness, then health 
will come to us. Those beasts were formerly concealed in us, but they 
did not reveal themselves. 

It may happen that those who are otherwise attaining perfection 
are tripped up by the demons on some minor matter. They should at 
once use every means to wrench this out of themselves a hundred 
times over. 

Like the winds, which sometimes in calm weather ruffle only the 
surface of the sea and at other times stir up the depths, so there are 
the dark blasts of evil. Think about them. They reach down to disturb 
the very hearts of those dominated by the passions, whereas among 
those who have made progress, they merely ruffle the surface of the 
mind. That is why the latter soon recover their usual calm for their 
hearts were left un defiled. 

It is characteristic of the perfect that they always know whether 
a thought comes from within themselves, or from God, or from ihc 
demons. Kerncmher ih:it demons do not automatically propose evil iit 
the outset. I lerc wc hnve ii piobkm truly hard to penclriite, 

'J'wo ctirporeiii eyes H'^"' ''W'" '** 'he body, 'Mul (he cyt*'* of the 
hcurl lire ciiii^hii'Mcd by disiernnicnt in things .seen ,uui unnccii, 



25J 



A BRIEF SUMMARY OF ALL THE 
PRECEDING STEPS 



A strong faith is the mother of renunciation. The opposite of this 
is quite evident. 

Unswerving hope is the gateway to detachment. The opposite of 
this is perfectly obvious. 

Love of God is the foundation of exile, The opposite of this is 
quite evident. 

Self-criticism begets obedience and the longing for health. 

Self-control is the mother of health. The mother of self-control is 
the thought of death and the memory of the gall and vinegar of God 
our Lord. 

The solitary life is the helper and the foundation of chastity. 
Fasting quenches the fires of the flesh. And contrition of heart is the 
foe of dirty thoughts. 

Faith and withdrawal from the world are the death of avarice. 

Compassion and love are betrayers of the body. 

Unremitting prayer is the death of despondency. 

Remembrance of the judgment is an encouragement to zeal. 

Love of being dishonored is a cure for anger. And the singing of 
hymns, the display of compassion, and poverty are quenchers of sor- 
row. 

Detachment from the things perceived by the senses means the 
vision of things spiritual. 



256 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN F 



Silence and solitude are the foes of vainglory. If you are in a 
crowd, seek out dishonor. 

A gloomy environment will cure open pride, but only He who is 
invisible from all eternity can cure the pride hidden within us. 

The deer destroys all visible serpents and humility destroys those 
of the spirit. '^^ 

We can learn to perceive intelligible things clearly by means of 
every thing that exists in the natural world. 

A snake can shed its old skin only if it crawls into a tight hole, 
and we can shed our old tendencies, our worn-out soul, and the gar- 
ment of the old man only if we take the straight and narrow path of 
fasting and dishonor. 

Just as a large-bodied bird cannot fly heavenward, neither can 
anyone who feeds his flesh and gives in to it. 

Dried-up mud draws no pigs. Dried-up flesh harbors no demons. 

Too many sticks can choke a fire and put it out, causing a lot of 
smoke. An excess of sorrow can often make a soul turn smoky and 
dark and dries up the stream of tears. i 

A blind archer is useless. An argumentative disciple is a lost one. 

Tempered iron can sharpen what is untempered. A zealous 
brother can frequently save a lazy one. 

Eggs warmed in dung''* hatch out. Unconfessed evil thoughts 
hatch evil actions. 

Galloping horses vie with each other. A zealous community en- 
courages individual zeal. 

Clouds hide the sun. Evil thoughts bring shadows to the mind 
and ruin it. 

A condemned man on his way to execution does not discuss the 
theater. A man genuinely lamenting his sins will never pander to his 
stomach. 

Poor men are all the more conscious of their own deprivation 
when they look at regal treasures. A soul reading of the great virtues 
of the Fathers adopts a much more humble outlook. 

Iron is drawn willy-nilly by a magnet. A man in the grip of \i,h\ 
habits is mastered by them. 

Oil tames the reluctant sea, Fasting puts down the nivolvirnury 
fires of the body, 



III. Set- mill- Hfi, p .'Jll, 

114. Kiulrr I'l'iiil.i "llif liiiMiiii" ik»lj'iii fill "iliiiin" ikcifiKi) 



J17 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



Dammed waters run back upstream. The soul constricted by 
dangers often returns to God and is saved by repentance. 

A wearer of perfume is detected, whether he wishes it or not, by 
the aromas around him. A carrier of God's Spirit is detected in his 
speech and in his lowliness,"' 

Winds stir the deep and temper stirs the mind more than any- 
thing else. 

What the eye has not seen and what has only been heard of does 
not greatly stir desire. So ignorance is therefore a great help to the 
chaste. 

Thieves do not pounce where royal armor is stored. Spiritual 
thieves do not readily pounce on the man who has united his heart 
with prayer. 

Fire does not give birth to snow, and those seeking honor here 
will not come to enjoy it in heaven. 

One spark has often set fire to a great forest, and it has been 
found that one good deed can wipe away a multitude of sins (cf. James 
3:5, 5:20). 

It is impossible to destroy wild beasts without arms. It is impossi- 
ble to achieve freedom from anger without humility. 

Just as by nature we cannot exist without food, we cannot afford 
to slip into carelessness even for an instant at any time up to the mo- 
ment of death. 

Like the sun's ray passing through a crack and lighting up the 
house, showing up even the finest dust, the fear of the Lord on enter- 
ing the heart of a man shows up all his sins. 

Crabs are easy to catch, for sometimes they walk forward and 
sometimes backward. In the same way, the soul that tries laughter 
now, grief then, high living some other time, cannot make progress. 

The sleepy are easily robbed and those living close to the world 
are easily despoiled of their virtue. 

When a man fights a lion, it is fatal to glance away for even a mo- 
ment. So too with the man fighting against his body, who yields for 
the merest instant. 

It is dangerous to climb a rotten ladder, and in the same way all 
honor, glory, and power pose a danger to humility. 

A man eager for salvation thinks of death and the judgment in 



1 l.v HTM adds a sentence: "As the sun makes gold glitter, so virtue m.ikes iiiiitii- 
test the marl who possesse.s it." 



2.5K 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN I 



the same way that a starving man thinks of bread. 

Tears can wash away sins as water washes away something writ- 
ten. And as some, lacking water, use other means to wipe off what is 
written, souls lacking tears beat and scour away their sins with grief, 
groans, and deep sorrow. 

A dung heap breeds worms in abundance. Piles of food breed an 
abundance of lapses, evil thoughts, and dreams. 

A man whose legs are bound cannot walk freely. Those who 
hoard treasures cannot climb to heaven. 

A new wound can easily be cured, but the very opposite is true of 
souls with long-standing wounds. If they are healed at all, it is only 
with the greatest difficulty. 

A dead man cannot walk. A man in despair cannot be saved. 

A man who asserts that he has the true faith and yet continues to 
sin is like a man without eyes. And the man who has no faith but who 
does good is like someone who draws water and then pours it into a 
barrel with holes. 

A ship with a good navigator comes safely to port, God willing. 
A soul with a good shepherd climbs easily' heavenward, even if it has 
earlier done much wrong. 

A man, no matter how prudent, may easily go astray on a road if 
he has no guide. The man who takes the road of monastic life under 
his own direction may easily be lost, even if he has all the wisdom of 
the world. 

If anyone is weak in body and if he has suffered grievous falls, let 
him turn onto the path of humility, taking on himself what is typical 
of that way, for there is no other road to salvation. 

Just as someone in the grip of a long illness cannot return to in- 
stant health, it is not possible to overcome passions — not even one of 
them — in a quick moment. 

Keep track of the exact condition of each passion and of each vir- 
tue, and you will know exactly how you are making progress. 

Those who take mud in exchange for gold are suffering a loss. So 
too with those who hold forth on things spiritual for the sake of mate- 
rial advantage. 

Many have been speedily forgiven their sins. But no one li;i.s rap- 
idly acquired dispassioii, for this requires much time and Innginjt,"* 
and (lod. 



I ](i- K^iilcr )t\\c\ "lirltor'* (/>mn»m) ut dd tillcrri^ilivr tn "lori)(iii)(" {p»tlmil\ 



JH9 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



We should find out which animals and which birds seek to harm 
us at the time of sowing, at the time when the shoots are green, and at 
the time of harvest, and we should arrange our traps accordingly, 

A man in a fever ought not to commit suicide. And right up to 
the moment of death we should never despair. 

It would be quite wrong for a man to go straight from burying 
his father to his own wedding, and it would be quite wrong for those 
in mourning for their sins to look for honor, rest, or glory in this life 
from men. 

Citizens live in one sort of place, convicts in another. So too there 
ought to be a difference in status between those who mourn their sins 
and those who are innocent. 

A king ordains that a soldier badly wounded in his presence in 
battle should not be dismissed but, in fact, promoted. In the same 
way, the King of heaven gives a crown to the monk who has endured 
many perils from demons. 

Perception is a property of the soul. Sin is a battering of this 
property. Perception brings about the end or the lessening of evil, 
and it is a product of conscience. Conscience is the word and censure 
that come from our guardian angel, and we have it from the time of 
baptism. And it is for this reason that the unbaptized do not feel very 
much bitterness of soul for their evil deeds. 

The lessening of evil yields abstinence from evil, and such absti- 
nence is the starting point of repentance. The beginning of repen- 
tance is the beginning of salvation, and the beginning of salvation is a 
good intention, which, in turn, is the begetter of labors. The begin- 
ning of labors is virtue and the begiriing of virtue is a flowering, and 
the flowering of virtue is the beginning of activity. 

The offspring of virtue is perseverance. The fruit and offspring 
of perseverance is habit, and the child of habit is character. 

Good character begets fear, and fear begets observance of the 
commandments, by which I mean those of heaven and earth. To keep 
the commandments is to show love, and the starting point of love is 
an abundance of humility, which in turn is the daughter of dispas- 
sion. To have dispassion is to have the fullness of love, by which I 
mean the complete indwelling of God in those who, through dispas- 
sion, are pure of heart for they shall see God (Matt, .^:8). To Him be 
glory forever and ever. Amen. 



260 



Step 27 



ON STILLNESS 



We are like purchased slaves, like servants under contract to the 
unholy passions. And because this is so, we know a little of their de- 
ceits, ways, impositions and wiles. We know of their evil despotism in 
our wretched souls. But there are others who fully understand the 
tricks of these spirits, and they do so because of the working of the 
Holy Spirit and because of the freedom they themselves have man- 
aged to achieve. We in our sickness can only imagine the sort of relief 
that would come with good heahh; but they, being healthy, can un- 
derstand and talk about the weakness that goes hand in hand with 
sickness. 

Now this is why, being weak and infirm, I hesitate to hold forth 
to you in this discourse on the haven of solitude. I know only too well 
that at the table of good fellowship there is always some dog waiting 
to grab a piece of bread, a soul in other words, to run off with it in its 
mouth and to devour it at leisure. Therefore I want nothing said by 
me to give room to that dog, to give a chance to those on the lookout 
for such an opportunity. I do not think it right to talk about peace to 
tho.se brave followers of our King, those warriors who are in the 
midsi of battle. I will merely say that crowns of peace and calm are 
ready for tho.se who do nol weaken in the fight. 

Still, the sub|cct .should be mentioned so as not to offend anyone. 
I shall thercCorr, wilh your |>crmis.sion, speak briefly about stillness 

Stillness of the body if. llir luctirate knowledge and niiuiuyeim-iH 



lh\ 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



of one's feelings and perceprions. Stillness of soul is the accurate 
knowledge of one's thoughts and is an unassailable mind. 

Brave and determined thinking is a friend of stillness. It is al- 
ways on the watch at the doors of the heart, killing or driving off in- 
vading notions. What I mean by this will be well understood by the 
man who practices stillness in the deep places of the heart, while the 
novice will have no experience or knowledge of it. 

A shrewd hesychast requires no words. He is enlightened by 
deeds rather than by words. 

The -Start of stillness is the rejection of all noisiness as something 
that will trouble the depths of the soul. The final point is when one 
has no longer a fear of noisy disturbance, when one is immune to it. 
He who when he goes out does not go out in his intellect^ '^ is gentle 
and wholly a house of love, rarely moved to speech and never to an- 
ger. 7 he opposite to all this is manifest. 

Strange as it may seem, the hesychast is a man who fights to keep 
his incorporeal self shut up in the house of the body. 

The cat keeps hold of the mouse. The thought of the hesychast 
keeps hold of his spiritual mouse. Do not mock the analogy. Indeed, if 
you do, it shows you still do not understand the meaning of stillness. 

A solitary is not the same as a monk living with another monk. A 
solitary has to be very much on guard, and his mind has to be alert. 
The second kind of monk often helps his brother, but an angel helps 
the solitary. 

The powers of heaven join in living and worship with the man 
who practices stillness in his soul. I shall not say anything to you 
about the opposite situation. 

The profundities of dogma are great and the mind of the solitary 
leaps over them not without danger. '^^ 

It is risky to swim in one's clothes. A slave of passion should not 
dabble in theology. 

The cell of a hesychast is the body that surrounds him, and with- 
in him is the dwelling place of knowledge. 

When a man sick with a passion in his soul attempts the solitary 
life, he resembles a man jumping from a ship into the sea and imagin- 
ing that he will reach shore safely on a plank. 



117. I.e., who maintains inner solitude when he goe."; out of his hermitiigf. 

118. Or: "capers among them not without danger." El'I'M transiatos: "leii|is ovor 
them safely." 



262 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN I 



A solitary life is suitable for someone who is fighting his clay, 
provided the time is right and provided he has a spiritual director. 
The fact is that you need the strength of an angel if you are to live a 
solitary life. Here, of course, I am talking of those who live a real life 
of solitude in soul and body. 

When a hesychast gets lazy, he starts telling lies. He hints at oth- 
ers to get him out of his solitude, and when he leaves his cell he puts 
the blame on devils. What he does not know is that he has turned into 
his own devil. 

I have known hesychasts whose flaming urge for God was limit- 
less. They generated fire by fire, love by love, desire by desire. 

A hesychast is like an angel on earth. With the paper of love and 
the letters of zeal, he has freed his prayer from sloth and carelessness. 
Openly he cries out: "O God, my heart is ready" (Ps. 56:8). He says, "I 
sleep, but my heart is awake" (Song of Songs 5:2). 

Close the door of your cell to your body, the door of your tongue 
to talk, and the gate within to evil spirits. The endurance of the sailor 
is tried by the noonday sun or when he is becalmed, and the endur- 
ance of the solitary is tested by his lack of necessary supplies. The one 
jumps into the water and swims when he is impatient, the other goes 
in search of a crowd when he is discouraged. 

Do not be afraid of loud nonsense. The spirit of mourning is nei- 
ther afraid of it nor upset by it. 

Those with a mind accustomed to true prayer talk directly to the 
Lord, as if to the ear of the emperor. Those praying aloud fall down 
in front of the Lord as if before the entire senate. Those who live in 
the world make their pleas to the emperor in the midst of bustling 
crowds. Now if you have learned the technique of prayer systemati- 
cally, you will certainly grasp what I am saying. 

Sit in a high place and keep watch if you can, and you will see the 
thieves come, and you will discover how they come, when and from 
where, how many and what kind they are as they steal your clusters 
of grapes. 

When the watchman gets tired, he stands up and he prays. And 
then, sitting down once more, he bravely carries on with his task. 

A man knew about all ihcsc things from experience and unntcd 
lo descril>c ihcni in close detail. Hut he was afraid. I Ic liid not wisli ta 
discourage those already cngagcti in this or by his words to NCiirf off 
those on (iu: ])oini of cnil)arkiiif{ on this way. 

A man w ho bc){ins l(t lidk Niiblly and with ktiowl('d({r rtlHUil mill* 



J6I 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



ness stirs up the demons against himself, for there is no one else who 
can so hold up their evil work to contempt. 

He who has achieved stillness has arrived at the very center of 
the mysteries, but he would never have reached these depths if he had 
not first seen and heard the sound of the waves and of the evil spirits, 
if he had not even been splashed by those waters. Paul confirms this. 
If he had not been caught up into Paradise as into stillness, he would 
never have heard the unspeakable words (cf. 2 Cor. 12:4). The ear of 
the solitary will hear wonders from God. Hence the words of the all- 
wise Job: "Will not my ear receive amazing things from Him?" (Job 
4:12). 

The solitary runs away from everyone, but does so without ha- 
tred, just as another runs toward the crowd, even if without enthusi- 
asm. The solitary does not wish to be cut off from the divine 
sweetness. 

Go now. At once. Give away everything you have. ("Sell what 
you own." That needs time.) Give to the poor monks so that their 
prayers may be with you in your solitude. Take up your cross, carry- 
ing it in obedience, and endure strongly the burden of your thwarted 
will. And then, "Come, follow me" (Matt. 19:21). Come to union with 
most blessed stillness and I will teach you the workings and the be- 
havior of the spiritual powers. They never grow tired of their ever- 
lasting praise of their Maker, nor does he who has entered into the 
heaven of stillness cease to praise his Creator. Spirits have no thought 
for what is material, and those who have become immaterial in a ma- 
terial body will pay no attention to food, for the former know noth- 
ing of it and the latter need no promise of it; the former are 
unconcerned about money and chattels and the latter are heedless of 
the malice of evil spirits. In those dwelling above, there is no yearn- 
ing for the visible creation, while those on earth below have no long- 
ing for what can be sensed, because the former never cease to make 
progress in love and the latter will never cease to imitate them. The 
former know well the value of their progress; the latter understand 
their own love and longing for the ascent to heaven. The former will 
desist only when they rise to the realm of the Seraphim; the latter 
will grow tired only when they come at last to be angels. Blessed is he 
who hopes; thrice blessed is he who lives to see the promise of being 
an angel. 



2«S4 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



The Differences between the Various Kinds of Stillness 

As everyone knows, there are differences of concept ;tiu! :iiin in 
each of the sciences. There are defects in all, because of some t;nhirc 
of zeal or strength. Hence some enter this harbor, this sea, or nuked 
the abyss of solitary life because they cannot control their tongues or 
because of some previous habit of the flesh. Others do so because they 
have a bad temper, which they cannot restrain in company, or be- 
cause they arrogantly think it better to sail on their own rather than 
under the guidance of someone else. Others do so because if they live 
amid material things they cannot do without them. Some think that a 
life of solitude will enhance their zeal, and some wish to punish them- 
selves in secret for their faults. Some think of the glory a solitary life 
will earn them. And there are some — may the Son of Man find them 
on earth when He comes back — who undertake this holy way of life 
because of a delight in, a thirst for the love and sweetness of God, and 
they achieve a union of this kind only after they have shed all despon- 
dency. For to link despondency to the loving of God is rather like 
committing adultery. , 

I have put together a ladder of ascent, though my meager knowl- 
edge makes me something of a second-rate architect. Still, let each one 
take note of the step on which he is standing. Is it on the step of self- 
will, of fame, of a loose tongue, of hot temper? Or of possessiveness? 
Is it on the step of atonement for sin, of greater zeal, of loving fire 
added to fire? "The last shall be first and the first last" (Matt. 19:30). 
The first seven are the work of the world's week, and some are good 
while others are not. But the eighth clearly bears the mark of the age 
to come. 

O solitary monk, watch out for the hour of the wild beasts, be- 
cause if you do not, then you will be unable to get ready the appropri- 
ate traps. If you have managed to shake off despondency, this task 
will be superfluous, but if it still plagues you, I do not know how you 
can endure the life alone. 

Why is it that there were not as many lights among the holy fa- 
thers at Tabennisi as at Scetis?"^ Cope with that question if you can. 
I cannot say why. Or rather, I do not wish to. 



1 I';. ■l';ilifntiisi III r|i|U'r r.^vjH WiiN tlic silc iif St l>;uhomiii>.' iiiM rini|(i«»l«'ry, It! 
(■hiirin.'UTislii- tiMiiin-s V.VVI- ii .sirii'l ininniLiiiily lilf urnlc-i :iii .ilsl"ii unli ini>«li Ullii 



idi 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



Some work to reduce the passions. Others sing psalms and spend 
most of their time in prayer. Some turn to the depths of contempla- 
tion. But whatever the situation is, let it be investigated in accordance 
with the ladder and accepted in the Lord. 

There are some idle souls in the monasteries. Giving way to 
whatever feeds that idleness, they come to an utterly bad end. Others 
by living in community strip themselves of idleness. This often oc- 
curs not only with the careless but with the zealous too. 

The same may be said regarding the solitary life, for it has re- 
ceived many experienced monks but has rejected them because of 
their self-direction and proved them to be lovers of pleasure. It has 
accepted others and made them zealous and fervent by fear and con- 
cern for the burden of their judgment. 

The man who is foul-tempered and conceited, hypocritical and a 
nurse of grievances, ought never to enter the life of solitude, for fear 
he should gain nothing but the loss of his sanity. Someone free of 
these faults will know what is best. Or perhaps, I think, not even he. 

The following are the signs, the stages, and the proofs of practic- 
ing stillness in the right way— a calm mind, a purified disposition, 
rapture in the Lord, the remembrance of everlasting torments, the 
imminence of death, an insatiable urge for prayer, constant watchful- 
ness, the death of lust, no sense of attachment, death of worldMness, 
an end to gluttony, a foundation for theology, '^o a ^q\\ ^f discern- 
ment, a truce accompanied by tears, an end to talkativeness, and 
many other such things alien to most men. 

The following are signs of stillness practiced wrongly — poverty 
of spiritual treasures, anger on the increase, a growth of resentment, 
love diminished, a surge of vanity. And I will say nothing about all 
that follows from these. 

Our chapter has now reached the point at which we must deal 
with those living in obedience, especially as this step is directed for 
the most part towards them. 

With regard to those who lawfully, chastely, and in pure fashion 



worship in common. Sceti.s (the Wadi Natrun) in Lower Egypt was a center for h<_-ntiii ■ 
ages, where stillnes.s could be practiced by solitaries or small groups of nionlis, SoiJis 
was sometimes used as a general name to include Nitria as well, some forty miles lo the 
north. Many of the famou.s Fathers whose sayings are recorded in the great cdIIccmoiis 
of the Apophthegmata came from Scetis or \itrla. 

120. Theology here means the direct experience of d'od. 



2 Mi 



THE LADDER OV DIVINK ASCKN t 



are wedded to this orderly and admirable way of olialicniT, ih^ri* #r» 
manifestations—validated by the divinely inspiretl I'urlifrii UMil 
brought to perfection in their own time— manifL-siatinns iiriiiiii|(rt 
nied by daily increase and progress. There is an advLUuc in Imiu Iiii 
mility. There is lessening of bad temper, which must idler nil 
diminish as the gall is depleted. Darkness is scattered and love up 
proached. There is an estrangement from passions, an escape from 
hatred. Lust, under ceaseless criticism, diminishes; despondciuy 's 
unknown; and zeal grows. There is compassionate love and a banish- 
ment of pride. This is what everyone must seek, though few will he 
completely successful. A well without water does not deserve its 
name, and hence the obvious conclusion for those with understand- 
ing. 

A young wife who strays from her marriage defiles her body. A 
soul unfaithful to his vow defiles his spirit. The former is denounced, 
hated, beaten, and, most pitiable of all, thrown out.'^i For the latter 
there is pollution, forgetfulness of death, an insatiable belly, eyes out 
of control, vainglory at work, a longing for sleep, a calloused heart, 
insensitivity, a storing up of bad thoughts, an increase of consent, 
captivity of heart, spiritual upheaval, disobedience, argumentative- 
ness, attachment to things, unbelief, doubt, talkativeness, and— most 
serious this — free and easy relationships. Most wretched of all is a 
heart without compunction, which, in the careless, is succeeded by 
insensitivity, the mother of devils and of lapses. 

Of the eight evil spirits, five attack the solitary and three assail 
those living in obedience.'^^ 

A monk practicing stillness and struggling against despondency 
is often harmed, for the time to be given to prayer and contemplation 
is wasted in the tricks and wrestlings needed to fight his problem. 

I was once sitting in my cell having become slack. Indeed I was 
thinking of leaving it. But some visitors came, and when they began 
to praise me for leading the life of a hesychast, my slackness gave wiiy 



121. The ancieiil discipline of the Church allowed separalinn lr..m .in imUMhK.I 

spouse. Indeed a pricM was rfc|uircd lo divorce hl.s wife if she cm e.l mhlllery. 

'I'hcre was no (piesiion. however, of remarriage. 

122. Scholion H lll.'llCI iiletitifici. ihe five as despoiid.rn'v, vaiiiKliirv, |irli1». «•• 

jectir.n'and ant;er, and ihe ihiee rfs itlim..i,v, lust, .ntd .n.niM- !■ liMtlliv .lltttirrnl 

subdivision, cf, noic 'H, p li'> 



2«7 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



to vainglorious thoughts and f was amazed by the manner in which 
this three-horned demon stood up against all the others. 

The spirit of despondency is your companion. Watch him every 
hour. Note his stirrings and his movements, his inclinations and his 
changes of face. Note their character and the direction they take. 
Someone with the gift of calm from the Holy Spirit well understands 
what I have in view. 

The first task of stillness is disengagement from every affair good 
and bad, since concern with the former leads on to the latter. Second 
is urgent prayer. Third is inviolable activity of the heart. And just as 
you have to know the alphabet if you are to read books, so if you have 
missed out on the first task, you cannot enter upon the other two. 

I myself was occupied with the second of these tasks and entered 
the intermediate stage. A light came to me as I was thirsting and I 
asked there what the Lord was before He took visible form. The angel 
could not tell me because he was not permitted to do so. So I asked 
him: "In what state is He now?" and the answer was that He was in 
the state appropriate to Him, though not to us. "What is the nature of 
the standing or sitting at the right hand of the Father?" I asked. 
"Such mysteries cannot be taken in by the human ear," he replied. 
Then I pleaded with him right then to bring me where my heart was 
longing to go, but he said that the time was not yet ripe, since the fire 
of incorruption was not yet mighty enough within me. And whether, 
during all this, I was in the body or out of it, I cannot rightly say (of. 2 
Cor. 12:2). 

It is very hard to shake off the sleep of midday, particularly in 
summer time. Then — and perhaps only then — is manual work to be 
permitted. 

The demon of despondency, as I have discovered, opens the way 
for the demon of lust. It greatly weakens the body and causes that 
sleep which brings about pollutions in those practicing stillness. 
Fight hard against these demons and they in turn will furiously at- 
tack you. They will try to force you to desist from your labors, which, 
they will tell you, are of no value. But there is no better proof of the 
failure of the demons than the violence with which they attack us. 

When you come out in public, be sure to protect what you have 
accumulated. When the cage doors are opened, the birds fly out. And 
if that happens, then there is no point in continuing with stillness. 



2m 



THE LADDER OF DIVINF. ASCIN 1 



A small hair disturbs the eye. A minor concern mtcrlfirn with 
stillness, for, after all, stillness means the expulsion of ilioiichii iiiul 
the rejection of even reasonable cares. 

He who has truly attained stillness ignores the flesh. (Jod dnrn 
not make false promises. 

The man who wishes to offer a pure mind to God but who is 
troubled by cares is like a man who expects to walk quickly even 
though his legs are tied together. 

There are not many outstanding experts in worldly philosophy. 
But I would claim that rarer still are those who are truly expert in the 
philosophy of stillness. 

A man without experience of God ought not to undertake the 
solitary life. He leaves himself open to many hazards. Stillness chokes 
the inexperienced. Never having tasted the sweetness of God, such 
people waste time in being set upon, robbed, made despondent, dis- 
tracted. 

A man who has experienced the value of prayer avoids crowds 
like a wild donkey. After all, it is prayer that makes him resemble the 
donkey and makes him shun everybody. 

A man who is gripped by passions and lives in the desert listens 
to their prattle. I was taught this by that blessed elder, George Arsi- 
laites,!^^ whom your reverence'^'* knows. He was once the director of 
my useless soul and the guide who brought me to stillness. "I have 
observed," he said, "that the demons of vainglory and concupiscence 
usually attack us in the morning. In the middle of the day, the attack 
comes from the demons of despondency, gloom, and anger; and it 
comes in the evening from the dung-loving demons of the miserable 
stomach." 

It is better to live poor and obedient than to be a solitary who has 
no control over his thoughts. 

"Fhe man who has entered on stillness for a good reason but who 
fails to see how it benefits him daily is either practicing it in the 
wrong way or is being robbed of it by self-esteem. 

Stillness is worshipping God unceasingly and waiting on Him. 



12.!, A .splriiiial iii:im<.t whose rminc occurs in (he narratives ot Anasiiniim, Siitiii 

lives, 55 V and 12. 

124. I.LV, John, Alihnl <il KiiiiUii, ill wIkisc rc(|UCSt /'*(■ l.mlJri was «illlfil 



369 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



Let the remembrance of Jesus ^^^ be present with your every 
breath. Then indeed you will appreciate the value of stillness. 

Self-will is the ruin of the monk living in obedience. But ruin for 
the solitary is the interruption of prayer. 

If you rejoice because visitors have come to your cell, you should 
realize that you are taking a holiday not just from despondency but 
from God. So the model for your prayer should be the widow 
wronged by her adversary (cf. Luke 18:1-8), and for your stillness that 
great and angelic hermit Arsenius.i^^ In your solitude think of this 
marvelous hesychast and remember how he used to send away those 
who came to visit him, lest he be deprived of the better part. 

I am aware of the fact that demons often persuade foolish foot- 
loose people to go around visiting right-living hermits. i^? The de- 
mons do this to create some hindrance, if they can, even through 
these. So watch out for such people and do not worry about offending 
them by your devout behavior. Indeed, offensiveness of this kind may 
stop their footloose career. But be careful. Do not make the mistake of 
offending a soul who in his thirst has come to draw water from you. 
Discretion is necessary in everything. 

The life of stillness, especially when practiced by solitaries, must 
be guided by conscience and common sense. If you run the race as it 
should be run, if every enterprise, utterance, thought, step, move- 



125. The remembrance of Jesus is usually the context in which the Jesus Prayer is 
practiced. Here it seems to be equivalent to the Prayer it.self (cf. note .51 and the Pref- 
ace, p- 4S). 

126. Arsenius was a Roman of senatorial rank who had held office in the imperial 
palace. He was mistakenly thought by hagiographic sources to have been the tutor of 
the Emperor Theodosius' sons Arcadius and Honorius. Toward the end of the fourth 
century he left Rome and retired to a hermitage in Scetis, where he lived until its dev- 
astation by barbarian nomads in 434, He was at Canopus near Alexandria for a time, 
where he was frequently consulted by Archbishop Theophiius (d. 412). After the devas- 
tation of Scetis he lived at T'roe, between Cairo and Helouan. He was famous for his 
austerity and avoidance of visitors. The alphabetical collection of The Sayings of the De- 
sert Fathers assigns forty-four sayings or maxims to him, with a further two under R 
attributed to a monk of Rome. For a full list of references see DHGE iv, cols. 745-7. 

127. From the late fourth century onward visitors came to the Egyptian desert in 
large numbers to see for themselves how the monks lived, Some were serious inquirers 
like Basil, Rufinus, Jerome and Palladius. Others were mere tourists. On the irrii;iiiou 
caused by some visitors see, for example, The Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Arsenius 2K, 
and The Lives of the Desert Fathers I, 19-24. 



270 



THE LADDER OF DIVINK ASCI-.N I 



ment, is done according to the Lord, then the Lord's wnik In ihill** 
with spiritual perception as if He were there Him.self. Hiii if ii jiri'mii 
is somehow robbed, then he is not yet living in acconlaiUT with 
virtue. 

"With the harp I will expound what 1 have to say" (i's. 4H;^) und 
what I wish. And it will be in accordance with my imperfect itul^ 
ment. And in my prayer I will offer up my will, and from God I will 
draw assurance. 

Faith is the wing of prayer, and without it my prayer will return 
to my bosom. Faith is the unshaken stance of the soul and is unmoved 
by any adversity. The believing man is not one who thinks that God 
can do all things, but one who trusts that he will obtain everything. 
Faith is the agent of things unhoped for, as the thief proved (cf. Luke 
25:42-3). The mother of faith is hard work and an upright heart; the 
one builds up belief, the other makes it endure. Faith is the mother of 
the hesychast, for after all, how can he practice stillness if he does not 
believe? 

A man chained in prison is fearful of his judge, and the monk in 
his cell is fearful of God. But the court holds less terror for the one 
than the judgment seat of God for the other. My good friend, you 
have to be very much afraid if you are to practice stillness, and noth- 
ing else is quite so effective in scattering despondency. The prisoner 
is always on the watch for the judge to come to the jail, and the true 
worker is ever on the watch for the coming of death. A weight of sor- 
row bears down on the one, while for the other there is a fountain of 
tears. 

Take hold of the walking stick of patience, and the dogs will soon 
stop their impudent harassment. Patience is a labor that does not 
crush the soul. It never wavers under interruptions, good or bad. The 
patient monk is a faultless worker who has turned his faults into vic- 
tories. Patience sets a boundary to the daily onslaught of suffering. It 
makes no excuses and ignores the self. The worker needs patience 
more than food, since the one brings him a crown while the other 
brings destruction. The patient man has died before his death, his ci'jl 
being his tomb. Patience comes from hope and mourning, and itntri-(l 
to lack those is to be a slave to despondency, 

I he warrior of ("hrisi knows how to attack some cnriiii«N Nl tt 
distance and sonic at close (pinrlers. Sometimes the lif^hl ruriin M 
crown and sometimes the iiti\\tllingiirss to fight has |iioiliu'<'(t dUrtPi 



271 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



ter. Hard and fast rules cannot be laid down for such matters, since 
we all have differences of character and disposition. 

Keep a special watch for the one spirit that unfailingly attacks 
you whether you stand, walk, sit, stir, get up, pray, or sleep. 

Some who preside over the race of stillness always keep before 
them the words: "I see the Lord before me continually" (Ps. 15:8). But 
all the loaves of heavenly bread do not have the same appearance. 
Others therefore keep to the words: "In your patience possess your 
souls" (Luke 21:19). Others: "Watch and pray" (Matt. 26:41). Others: 
"Prepare your works for your death" (Prov. 24:27). Others: "I was 
humbled and He saved me" (Ps. 114:6). Others: "The sufferings of the 
present time are not to be compared with the glories of the future" 
(Rom. 8:18). Others constantly ponder the words: "Lest he snatch you 
away and there be no one to deliver you" (Ps. 49:22). All race, but 
only one receives the prize without effort. 

Someone who has made progress is at work not only when awake 
but also when he is asleep. Some, therefore, even in sleep show their 
contempt for the demons who approach them, and urge chastity on 
the wanton women of their imaginings. On the other hand, do not be 
on the lookout for these visitations, preparing for them in advance, 
because the condition of stillness is essentially simple and free. 

Anyone planning to construct a tower and cell of stillness will 
first begin the job by sitting down to count the cost. He will feel his 
way by prayer. He will ponder whether he has within himself what it 
takes to complete the task, and he will be careful not to lay the foun- 
dations and then prove a joke to his enemies and a hindrance to others 
who labor (cf. Luke 14:28-30). 

Pay careful attention to whatever sweetness there may be in your 
soul, in case it has been concocted by cruel and crafty physicians. 

You should spend most of the night in prayer and only what is 
left of it in psalmody. And during the day prepare yourself as best 
you can. 

Light and recollection come to the mind by way of reading the 
Scriptures. The words are those of the Holy Spirit, and they provide 
guidance to the readers. Let your reading be a preliminary to action, 
since you are a doer (cf. James 1:22). Put the words into practice, and 
then further reading will be unnecessary. Try to be enlightened by 
the words of salvation through your labors and not from books. And 
until you have acquired spiritual power, do not read works that have 



272 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN 1 



various levels of meaing'^^ since, being obscure, they may bring dark- 
ness over the weak. 

A single cup is sufficient to reveal the flavor of a wine, and a sin- 
gle word from a hesychast can reveal to those with taste his whole in- 
ner condition and activity. 

Let the soul's eye be ever on the watch for conceit, since nothing 
else can produce such havoc. 

Once outside your cell, watch your tongue, for the fruits of many 
labors can be scattered in a moment. 

Stay away from what does not concern you, for curiosity can de- 
file stillness as nothing else can. 

When people visit you, offer them what they need for body and 
spirit. If they happen to be wiser than we are, then let our own si- 
lence reveal our wisdom. If they are brothers who share with us the 
same type of life, we should open the door of speech to them in prop- 
er measure. Best of all, however, is to deem everyone our superior. 

I would have liked to forbid novices to engage in any toil during 
times of vigil in common. But I demurred because of the monk who 
all night carried sand in his cloak.i^^ 

Doctrine tells of the holy, uncreated, and adorable Trinity. And 
there is a contrast here with what is said about the providential incar- 
nation of One of the Persons of the hymned Trinity. What is plural in 
the Trinity is single in Him. What there is single is plural here. ^3° 
Similarly, some practices are appropriate for the way of stillness, and 
others for those living in obedience. 

The divine Apostle said: "Who has known the mind of the 
Lord?" (Rom. 1 1:34). I will say:"Who has known the mind of the man 
who is a hesychast in body and spirit?" 

Wealth and numerous subjects constitute the power of a king. 
Abundance of prayer constitutes the power of the hesychast. 



12«. I.e., works i>f an iillegorieal nature, for which spiritual discernim-m is tn*f<?i<- 
sary in order u> penelrate !o ilic true meaning. 

\19. riic yoimn l';iclioiiiiii,s wu.s thus trained liy hi.s abha, Palanupii, Iti sUv iiwilkf 
during vigil.s (th(»ii(fh in tan ihcy i-iirricil the sand in baskets): I'ai-tioninis, i iin I'lima, ) 
6; Kijswi'Vile, I'ltiiv I'liirum, )>. I I f , 

I ii>. In the rnnily there itr<r ihl'cr I'crsoiis but one nature, in ( hiul ihrip ti Mill 
I'erson but two rialnreH. 



27J 



Step 28 



ON PRAYER 



Prayer is by nature a dialog and a union of man with God. Its 
effect is to hold the world together. It achieves a reconciliation with 
God, 

Prayer is the mother and daughter of tears. It is an expiation of 
sin, a bridge across temptation, a bulwark against affliction. It wipes 
out conflict, is the work of angels, and is the nourishment of all bodi- 
less beings. Prayer is future gladness, action without end, wellspring 
of virtues, source of grace, hidden progress, food of the soul, enlight- 
enment of the mind, an axe against despair, hope demonstrated, sor- 
row done away with. It is wealth for monks, treasure of hermits, 
anger diminished. It is a mirror of progress, a demonstration of suc- 
cess, evidence of one's condition, the future revealed, a sign of glory. 
For the man who really prays it is the court, the judgment hall, the 
tribunal of the Lord — and this prior to the judgment that is to come. 

Let us arise and pay heed to what that holy queen of the virtues 
cries out to us in a loud voice, saying: " 'Come to me, all of you who 
labor and are weighed down, and I will give you rest. 1 ake upon 
yourselves my yoke, and you will find rest for your souls' (.Matt: 
11:28-29), and a balm for the blows that fall on you. 'For my yoke is 
easy' (ibid. 30) and is a remedy for great sins." 

Those of us wishing to stand before our King and God and to 
speak with Him should not rush into this without some preparation, 
lest it should happen that — seeing us from afar without arms and 



274 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCKN F 



without the dress appropriate to those who appear before ttu- King- 
He should command His servants and His slaves to lay hold of us, lo 
drive us out of His sight, to tear up our petitions and to throw tlu-tn 
in our faces. 

When you set out to appear before the Lord, let the garment of 
your soul be woven throughout with the thread of wrongs no longer 
remembered. Otherwise, prayer will be useless to you, 

Pray in all simplicity. The publican and the prodigal son were 
reconciled to God by a single utterance. 

The attitude of prayer is the same for all, but there are many 
kinds of prayer and many different prayers. Some talk and deal with 
God as with a friend and master, lifting their praises and their re- 
quests to Him not for themselves but for others. Some look for great- 
er spiritual treasures and glory and for greater assurance in their 
prayers. Some beg to be freed entirely from their adversary. Some 
look for rank and others for relief from all their debts. Some seek free- 
dom from gaol or for charges against them to be dropped. 

But heartfelt thanksgiving should have first place in our book of 
prayer. Next should be confession and genuine contrition of soul. 
After that should come our request to the universal King. This meth- 
od of prayer is best, as one of the brothers was told by an angel of the 
Lord. 

If you ever found yourself having to appear before a human 
judge, you may use that as an example of how to conduct yourself in 
prayer. Perhaps you have never stood before a judge nor witnessed a 
cross-examination. In that case, take your cue from the way patients 
appeal to surgeons prior to an operation or a cautery. 

In your prayers there is no need for high-flown words, for it is 
the simple and unsophisticated babblings of children that have more 
often won the heart of the Father in heaven. 

Try not to talk excessively in your prayer, in case your mind is 
distracted by the search for words. One word from the publican suf- 
ficed to placate God, and a single utterance saved the thief. lalkativc 
prayer frequently distracts the mind and deludes it, whereas bre- 
vity'-^' makes for concentration. 

If it happens that, as you pray, some word evokes dclijjln or f«» 



HI, (;k moniiliifim, \x ilmrl |iiiiyi.TH (j) vnrlcd I'limcm. Mri- llic l'li<(ilt'|), |i ^A[ OS 
viii (l'^72), i-o], nil. 



37! 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



morse within you, linger over it; for at that moment our guardian an- 
gel is praying with us. 

However pure you may be, do not be forward in your dealings 
with God. Approach Him rather in all humihty, and you will be giv- 
en still more boldness. And even if you have climbed the whole lad- 
der of the virtues, pray still for the forgiveness of sins. Heed Paul's 
cry regarding sinners "of whom 1 am the first" (1 Tim. 1:15). 

Oil and salt are the condiments of food; chastity and tears give 
flight to prayer. 

If you are clothed in gentleness and in freedom from anger, you 
will find it no trouble to free your mind from captivity. 

Until we have acquired true prayer, we are like those who intro- 
duce children to walking. 

Make the effort to raise up, or rather, to enclose your mind with- 
in the words of your prayer; and if, like a child, it gets tired and fal- 
ters, raise it up again. The mind, after all, is naturally unstable, but 
the God Who can do everything can also give it firm endurance. Per- 
severe in this, therefore, and do not grow weary; and He Who sets a 
boundary to the sea of the mind will come to you too during your 
prayer and will say, "Thus far you shall come, and no farther" (Job 
38:11). Spirit cannot be bound, but where He is found everything 
yields to the Creator of spirit. 

If you have ever seen the Sun, you will be able to converse with 
Him in an appropriate way. But if you have not, then how can you 
truly talk to Him? 

The beginning of prayer is the expulsion of distractions from the 
very start by a single thought;'^^ the middle stage is the concentra- 
tion on what is being said or thought; its conclusion is rapture in the 
Lord. 

Prayer brings one sort of joy to those living in community, and 
another to those praying in stillness. Elation is sometimes characteris- 
tic of the former, but humility is always to be found in the latter. 

If you are careful to train your mind never to wander, it will stay 
by you even at mealtimes. But if you allow it to stray freely, then you 
will never have it beside you. "I would prefer to speak five words 
with my understanding" (1 Cor. 14:19) and so on, says the mighty 
practitioner of great and high prayer. But prayer of this sort is for- 
eign to infant souls, and so because of our imperfection we need 



132. Gk monologistos, which may mean "by a repeated short prayer." 



276 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN I 



quantity as well as quality in the words of our prayer, the former 
making a way for the latter, in accordance with the saying about giv- 
ing prayer to him who prays resolutely, albeit impurely and labori- 
ously (cf. 1 Kings [1 Sam.] 2:9). 

There is a difference between the tarnish of prayer, it disappear- 
ance, the robbery of it, and its defilement. Prayer is tarnished when 
we stand before God, our minds seething with irrelevancies. It disap- 
pears when we are led off into useless cares. It is robbed when our 
thoughts stray without our realization of the fact. And it is defiled 
when we are in any way under attack. 

If we happen not to be alone at the time of prayer, let us form 
within ourselves the demeanor of someone who prays. But if the ser- 
vants of praise are not sharing our company, we may openly put on 
the appearance of those at prayer. For among the weak, the mind of- 
ten conforms to the body. 

Total contrition is necessary for everyone, but particularly for 
those who have come to the King to obtain forgiveness of their sins. 
While we are still in prison, let us listen to him who told Peter to 
put on the garment of obedience, to shed his own wishes, and, having 
been stripped of them, to come close to the Lord in prayer, seeking 
only His will (cf. Acts 12:8). Then you will receive the God Who takes 
the helm of your soul and pilots you safely. 

Rise from love of the world and love of pleasure. Put care aside, 
strip your mind, refuse your body. Prayer, after all, is a turning away 
from the world, visible and invisible. What have I in heaven? Noth- 
ing. What have I longed for on earth besides You? Nothing except 
simply to cling always to You in undistracted prayer. Wealth pleases 
some, glory others, possessions others, but what I want is to cling to 
God and to put the hopes of my dispassion in Him (cf. Ps. 72:25, 28). 

Faith gives wings to prayer, and without it no one can fly up- 
ward to heaven. 

Those of us who are swept by passion must ceaselessly pray to 
the Lord, for all the passionate have advanced from passion to dispas- 
sion. 

Even if the judge has no fear of God, yet because a soul widowed 
from God by sin and by a fall disturbs Him, He will take revenge on 
the body, the soul's adversary, and on the spirits who dccliirc wur on 
her (cf. Luke 18:1-7). 

Our good Redeemer, by .tpccdily granting whai is uNkni, drttwi 
to His love those who arc ^rutcrul. But He kccp.s iiii|{riticliil miiilii 



J77 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



praying a long time before Him, hungering and thirsting for what 
they want, since a badly trained dog rushes off as soon as it is given 
bread and leaves the giver behind. 

After a long spell of prayer, do not say that nothing has been 
gained, for you have already achieved something. For, after all, what 
higher good is there than to cling to the Lord and to persevere in un- 
ceasing union with Him? 

A convicted man does not fear his sentence as much as a zealous 
man the time of prayer. So if he is shrewd and sensible, he will re- 
member this and will therefore be able to avoid reproach, anger, anxi- 
ety, concerns, affliction, satiety, temptation, and distractions. 

Get ready for your set time of prayer by unceasing prayer in 
your soul. In this way, you will soon make progress. I have observed 
that those who were outstanding in obedience and who tried as far as 
possible to keep in mind the thought of God were in full control of 
their minds and wept copiously as soon as they stood in prayer, for 
holy obedience had prepared them for this. 

One can be held back and distracted by the singing of psalms in a 
congregation. This does not happen when one is a solitary. However, 
despondency can assail the latter, while in the former situation the 
brethren can give help by their zeal. 

War reveals the love of a soldier for his king, and the time and 
practice of prayer show up a monk's love for God. So your prayer 
shows where you stand. Indeed, theologians say that prayer is a 
monk's mirror. 

Someone who is occupied with some task and continues with it 
at the hour of prayer is being fooled by the demons, for these thieves 
aim to steal one hour after another from us. 

Do not refuse a request to pray for the soul of another, even 
when you yourself lack the gift of prayer. For often the very faith of 
the person making the request will evoke the saving contrition of the 
one who is to offer the prayer. 

Do not become conceited when you have prayed for others and 
have been heard, for it is their faith which has been active and effica- 
cious. 

A child is examined each day without fail regarding what he has 
learned from his teacher. And it is reasonable to ask that there be a 
reckoning of each prayer we have undertaken, in order that we may 
have an idea of the power we have received from God. You should set- 
to this. And when you have prayed soberly, you will soon have lo 



278 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN I 



cope with bouts of ill temper, something our enemies aim for. 

Every virtuous act we do — and this is particularly true of 
prayer — should be done with great sensitivity. A soul prays with sen- 
sitivity when it has overcome anger. 

Whatever is obtained as a result of long and persistent prayer 
will remain. 

When a man has found the Lord, he no longer has to use words 
when he is praying, for the Spirit Himself ^vill intercede for him with 
groans that cannot be uttered (cf. Rom. 8:26). 

Do not form sensory images during prayer, for distraction will 
certainly follow. 

The confident expectation of gaining that for which one is beg- 
ging will show up during prayer. Confidence is doubt absent. Confi- 
dence is proof of the uncertain. 

If prayer is a matter of concern to you, then show yourself to be 
merciful. Monks will receive a hundredfold if they are merciful, and 
they will receive everything else in the life to come. 

When fire comes to dwell in the heart it resurrects prayer; and 
after prayer has been revived and taken up into heaven, a descent of 
fire takes place into the upper chamber of the soul. 

Some claim that prayer is better than the remembrance of death. 
But for my part, my praise goes out to the two natures in one per- 
son. '^^ 

When a good horse is mounted, it warms up and quickens its 
pace. The singing of psalms is the pace and a determined mind is the 
horse. It scents the battle from afar, is ready for it, and dominates the 
scene. 

It would be very wrong to snatch water from the mouth of a 
thirsty person. Worse, however, is the case of a soul that is praying 
with compunction and is snatched away from its task before it has 
completed its longed-for prayer. 

Do not stop praying as long as, by God's grace, the fire and the 
water have not been exhausted, ^^"^ for it may happen that never again 
in your whole life will you have such a chance to ask for the forgive- 
ness for your sins. 

A man with ;i taste for prayer may defile his mind with our cure 



I <i Hntvcr :Mul the remcmhrancc of dcutK (love and I'lMr) fnriii i> iiiillv iiM<ili<Kiitli 
t<i thill tii'lu'ccii ilu- (llvinc kiiul liiiinnii liHliirc'i in (^hrisi 

I.H, Ic , il^ lixi^ •>'• trrviii' iiml li'iiii I'CiDiiln 



27y 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



less word, and then at prayer he will not get what he wants in the 
way he used to. 

To keep a regular watch over the heart is one thing; to guard the 
heart by means of the mind is another for the mind is the ruler and 
high priest offering spiritual sacrifices to Christ, When heaven's holy 
fire lays hold of the former, it burns them because they still lack puri- 
fication. This is what one of those endowed with the title of Theolo- 
gian tells us.'-''^ But as for the latter, it enlightens them in proportion 
to the perfection they have achieved. It is one and the same fire that is 
called that which consumes (cf. Heb. 12:29) and that which illumi- 
nates (cf. John 1:9). Hence the reason why some emerge from prayer 
as from a blazing furnace and as though having been relieved of all 
material defilements. Others come forth as if they were resplendent 
with light and clothed in a garment of joy and of humility. But as for 
those who emerge without having experienced either of these effects, 
I would say that they have prayed in a bodily, not to say a Jewish, 
manner, and not spiritually. 

A body changes in its activity as a result of contact with another 
body. How therefore could there be no change in someone who with 
innocent hands has touched the Body of God?'^^ 

We may note that our all-good King, like some earthly monarch, 
sometimes distributes His gifts to His soldiers Himself, sometimes 
through a friend or a slave, and sometimes in a hidden way. But cer- 
tainly it will be in accordance with the garment of humility worn by 
each of us. 

A man stands before an earthly monarch. But he turns his face 
away and talks to the enemies of the king, and the king will be of- 
fended. In the same way, the Lord will be offended by someone who 
at prayer time turns away toward unclean thoughts. So if the dog 
keeps coming, drive him off with a stick and never give in to him, 
however much he may persist. 

Ask with tears, seek with obedience, knock with patience. For .so 
it goes that he "who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him 
who knocks it will be opened" (Matt. 7:8). 

In your prayers be careful not to beg too much on behalf of the 



135. St. Gregory of Na/.ianzus: cf. Or. 21, 2 (PG 35. 1084D). 

136. I.e., how are we not transformed by receiving the Body of Chri.si in 1 Inly 
Communion- 



280 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



opposite sex, for the enemy may come at you from the unprotectcti 
side.''" 

Do not insist on confessing your carnal acts in detail, since you 
might become a traitor to yourself. 

The hour of prayer is no time for thinking over necessities, nor 
even spiritual tasks, because you may lose the better part (cf. Luke 
10:42). 

Hold on to the staff of prayer and you will not fall. And even a 
fall will not be fatal, since prayer is a devout coercion of God (cf. 
Luke 18:5). 

The value of prayer can be guessed from the way the demons at- 
tack us during services in church, and its fruit may be inferred from 
the victory over the enemy. "By this I know You are on my side be- 
cause the enemy will not come to gloat over me" (Ps. 40:12) in the 
hour of battle. "I cried out with all my heart," said the psalmist (Ps. 
118:145). He is referring to body, soul, and spirit, and where the last 
two are gathered, God is in the midst of them (cf. Matt. 18:20). 

We are not all the same, either in bo/Iy or soul. Some profit from 
singing the psalms quickly, others from doing so slowly, the one 
fighting distraction, the others coping with ignorance. 

If you are always in dialog with the King in regard to your ene- 
mies, take heart whenever they attack you. A long struggle will not 
be necessary for you, for they will soon give up of their own accord. 
These unholy beings are afraid that you may earn a crown as a result 
of your battle against them through prayer, and besides, when 
scourged by prayer they will run away as though from a fire. 

Always be brave, and God will teach you your prayer. 

You cannot learn to see just because someone tells you to do so. 
For that, you require your own natural power of sight. In the same 
\vay, you cannot discover from the teaching of others the beauty of 
prayer. Prayer has its own special teacher in God, who "teaches man 
knowledge" (Ps. 93:10). He grants the prayer of him who prays. And 
He blesses the years of the just. 



H7. 1. 1-., from ihc suU- o1 llir Hrii|Miii l])raycr) rather ihiiii (iipiii tdi" ■iIiIp n) \\w 

shit-Id lascesis). 



3(11 



Step 29 



ON DISPASSION 



So here we are, stuck in the deepest pit of ignorance, in the dark 
passions of the body, in death's shadow, and still we have the temerity 
to hold forth on the subject of heaven on earth! 

Stars adorn the skies and dispassion has the virtues to make it 
beautiful. By dispassion I mean a heaven of the mind within the 
heart, which regards the artifice of demons as a contemptible joke. A 
man is truly dispassionate — and is known to be such — when he has 
cleansed his flesh of all corruption; when he has lifted his mind above 
everything created, and has made it master of all the senses; when he 
keeps hi.s soul continually in the presence of the Lord and reaches out 
beyond the borderline of strength to Him. And there are some who 
would claim that dispassion is resurrection of the soul prior to that of 
the body, while others would insist that it is a perfect knowledge of 
God, a knowledge second only to that of the angels. 

Dispassion is an uncompleted perfection of the perfect. I have 
been told this by someone who has tasted it. Its effect is to sanctify 
the mind and to detach it from material things, and it does so in such 
a way that, after entering this heavenly harbor, a man, for most of his 
earthly life, is enraptured, like someone already in heaven, and he is 
lifted up to the contemplation of God. Someone with an experience 
of this says, finely, somewhere that "God's mighty ones of the earth 
have become greatly exalted" (Ps. 46:10); and such a man, as wc hap- 



282 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN'l 



pen to know, was that Egyptian^^^ who joined others in lengthy 
prayer and held out his hands without ever resting them. 

One man is dispassionate, another is more dispassionate than ihc 
dispassionate.'-'''' The one will loathe evil while the other will have 
the blessing of an inexhaustible store of virtues. Purity is also said to 
be dispassion, and this is right, for it is a foretaste of the general res- 
urrection and of the incorruption of the corruptible. A dispassionate 
man was he who said that he had the mind of the Lord (cf 1 Cor. 
2:16), and the same is true of the Egyptian'*" who asserted that he was 
no longer afraid of the Lord. Similar too was the man who prayed 
that his passions might return to him.'''^' Has anyone been granted so 
much dispassion prior to the coming glory as that Syrian?'*^ David, 
the most glorious of the prophets, says to the Lord: "Spare me so that 
I may recover my strength" (Ps. 38:14); but the athlete of God''*-' 
cries: "Spare me from the waves of Your grace." 

A dispassionate soul is immersed in virtues as a passionate being 
is in pleasure. 

If the height of gluttony is that you force yourself to eat even 
when you are not hungry, then the height of temperance in a hungry 
man is that he restrains even the justifiable urges of nature. If the 
height of lechery is that one raves even over animals and over inani- 
mate things, then the height of purity is to look on everyone in the 
same way that one would regard inanimate objects. If the ultimate 
stage of cupidity is to gather without ever being satisfied, the ultimate 
stage of poverty is the willingness to dispense with one's own body. If 
the final point of despondency is to have no patience even when liv- 
ing in total peace, the final point of patience is to consider oneself to 
be at rest even in the midst of affliction. If to be furious even in soli- 
tude is talked of as a sea of wrath, then calmness, whether your slan- 
derer be present or not, will be a sea of long-suffering. If the high 



138. Abba Tithoes: The Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Tithoes 1 . 

!39. The man who is dispassionate, says scholion 3 (I1J3B), i.s unnttachcd (n 
things; the man who is more than dispassionate is unattached even to the rfnicinliriiiH'c 
of thing,s. 

14(1. Si. AtiKinv ihi-(;rcat: The Sayings of ihe Desert Fathers, Aniony tlu-Cii'cal M, 

141. Si. John Kolovos (ihr Dwarf): !he Sayings of the Desert iathers, |i>liii ilir Dm ntf 

142. Si. Kfilwiiiin the Synun 

143. St. KphriiiiM thr Synmi 



2113 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



point of vainglory is for a person to put on airs even when no one is 
present to praise him, the sure proof of its absence is that you keep 
your thoughts under control when someone is praising you to your 
face. If it is a sign of perdition, that is pride, to be arrogant even vi'hen 
poorly dressed, then surely amid high doings and great success lowly 
thoughts betoken saving humility. If complete enslavement to passion 
is indicated by the fact that one quickly submits to whatever the de- 
mons have sown in us, I take it then that a mark of holy dispassion is 
to be able to say unambiguously; "I did not recognize the evil one as 
he slipped away from me" (Ps, 100:4), nor did I know the time of his 
coming, the reasons for it, nor how he went. I am completely un- 
aware of such matters because I am and will ever be wholly united 
with God. 

The man deemed worthy to be of this sort during his lifetime has 
God always within him, to guide him in all he has to say or do or 
think. The will of the Lord becomes for him a sort of inner voice 
through illumination. All human teaching is beneath him. " 'When 
shall I come to appear before the face of God?' " he says (Ps. 41:3). "I 
can no longer endure the force of love. I long for the undying beauty 
that You gave me before this clay." 

What more has to be said? The dispassionate man no longer lives 
himself, but it is Christ Who lives in him (cf. Gal. 2:20). This is what 
we are told by the man who fought the good fight, completed the 
course, and stayed with the faith (cf. 2 Tim. 4:7). 

Just as a royal crown is not made up of one stone, so dispassion is 
incomplete if we neglect even one of the most ordinary virtues. 

Think of dispassion as a kind of celestial palace, a palace of the 
King of heaven. Think of the numerous mansions (cf. John 14:2) as so 
many dwelling places within this city. Think of the forgiveness of 
sins as being the fortifying wall of this Jerusalem. O my brothers, we 
should run to enter the bridal chamber of this palace, and if some bur- 
den of past habits or the passage of time should impede us, what a di- 
saster for us! Let us at least take up residence in one of the mansions 
near the bridal chamber. But if we begin to falter or weaken, we 
ought to ensure that at least we are inside the walls, since the man 
who does not get there before the end, who does not climb that wall, 
must camp out in the desert.'** This is the reason for the prayer of 
the man who said: "By my God I will climb a wall" (Ps. 17:30). An- 



144. HTM adds: "of fiends and passions.' 



284 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN I 



other, as if in the person of God Himself, says: "Is it not your sins 
that separate you and Me?" (Isa. 59:2). 

Friends, let us break through this wall of separation (cf. Eph. 
2:14), this wall that in our disobedience we built to our own harrri. Let 
us look there for the forgiveness of our sins, since there is no one in 
hell who can pardon us. Brothers, let us commit ourselves to this, for 
our names are on the lists of the devout. There must be no talk of "a 
lapse," "there is no time," or "a burden." To everyone who has re- 
ceived the Lord in baptism,'*^ "He has given the power to become 
children of God" (John 1:12). " 'Be still and know that I am God' (Ps. 
45:11) and am Dispassion," He says. To Him be glory forever and 
ever. Amen. 

Blessed dispassion raises the poor mind from earth to heaven, 
raises the beggar from the dunghill of passion. And love, all praise to 
it, makes him sit with princes, that is with holy angels, and with the 
princes of God's people (cf. Ps. 112:7-8). 



I4.i, Liu-rally: "m il>'- ''■iil> ')'' FfKiMirTotlon," n .'inindnrH jiiitriitlc nvnunvm fur t*«(t 



211 



Step 30 



ON FAITH, HOPE, AND LOVE 



And now at last, after all that has been said, there remains that 
triad, faith, hope, and love, binding and securing the union of all. 
"But the greatest of these is love" (1 Cor. 13:13), since that is the very 
name of God Himself (cf. 1 John 4:8). To me they appear, one as a ray, 
one as light, and one as a disk,'*^ and all as a single radiance and a 
single splendor. The first can make and create all things, the mercy of 
God encircles the second and keeps it from confusion, while the third 
never falls, never halts on its way, never gives respite to the man 
wounded by its blessed rapture. 

The man who wants to talk about love is undertaking to speak 
about God. But it is risky to talk about God and could even be dan- 
gerous for the unwary. Angels know how to speak about love, but 
even they do so only in proportion to the light within them. 

"God is love" (1 John 4:16). But someone eager to define this is 
blindly striving to measure the sand in the ocean. 

Love, by its nature, is a resemblance to God, insofar as this is hu- 
manly possible. In its activity it is inebriation of the soul. Its distinc- 
tive character is to be a fountain of faith, an abyss of patience, a sea of 
humility. 

Love is the banishment of every sort of contrariness, for love 
thinks no evil. 



14Ci. A comniiin image among the Feathers to express tin' iiiiilv oC ilu- IViniiy. 



286 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCENT 



Love, dispassion, and adoption are distinguished by name, and 
name only. Light, fire, and flame join to fashion one activity. So too 
with love, dispassion, and adoption. 

Fear shows up if ever love departs, for the man with no fear is 
either filled with love or is dead in spirit. 

There is nothing wrong about offering human analogies for 
longing, fear, concern, zeal, service, and love of God. Lucky the man 
who loves and longs for God as a smitten lover does for his beloved. 
Lucky the man whose fear of God is in no way less than the fear of 
the accused in front of a judge. Lucky the man who is caught up with 
the zeal of loyal slaves toward their owner. Lucky the man who is as 
passionately concerned with the virtues as a jealous husband watch- 
ing over his wife. Lucky the man who prays before God like a court- 
ier before the king. Lucky the man who strives without end to please 
the Lord as others try to please men. 

Not even a mother clings to her nursing child as a son of love 
clings to the Lord at all times. 

Someone truly in love keeps before his mind's eye the face of the 
beloved and embraces it there tenderly. Even during sleep the long- 
ing continues unappeased, and he murmurs to his beloved. That is 
how it is for the body. And that is how it is for the spirit. A man 
wounded by love had this to say about himself — and it really amazes 
me — "I sleep (because nature commands this) but my heart is awake 
(because of the abundance of my love)" (Song of Songs 5:2). You 
should take note, my brother, that the stag,''*^ which is the soul, de- 
stroys reptiles and then, inflamed by love, as if struck by an arrow, '^^ 
it longs and grows faint for the love of God (cf. Ps. 41:1). 

The impact of hunger is not always obvious, but thirst has a defi- 
nite and clear effect. It reveals to all the presence of a fever. Hence 
someone who yearns for God has this to say: "My soul is thirsty for 
God, for the mighty and living God" (cf. Ps. 41:3). 

If the sight of the one we love clearly makes us change complete- 
ly, so that we turn cheerful, glad, and carefree, what will the face of 
the Lord Himself not do as He comes to dwell, invisibly, in a pun- 
soul? 

When fear arises from the deeper reaches of the soul, ii ilcNiroyN 



H7. Sec [lolf KC, ]. .'.'(! 

14H. Or: "venom" <i e, nl llie ri'(ilili'i) 



387 



JOHN CLIMACUS 



and devours impurity. "Nait down my flesh with fear of You" {Ps. 
118:120). So it is said. 

Holy love has a way of consuming some. This is what is meant 
by the one who said, "You have ravished our hearts, ravished them" 
(Song of Songs 4:9). And it makes others bright and overjoyed, In this 
regard it has been said: "My heart was full of trust and I was helped, 
and my flesh has revived" (Ps. 27:7). For when the heart is cheerful, 
the face beams (cf. Prov. 15:13), and a man flooded'*' with the love of 
God reveals in his body, as if in a mirror, the splendor of his soul, a 
glory like that of Moses when he came face to face with God (cf. 
Exod. 34:29-35). 

Men who have attained this angelic state often forget to eat, and I 
really think they do not even miss their food. No wonder, since an 
opposite desire drives out the very wish to eat, and indeed I suspect 
that the bodies of these incorruptible men are immune to sickness, for 
their bodies have been sanctified and rendered incorruptible by the 
flame of chastity which has put out the flame. i^° My belief is that 
they accept without any pleasure the food set out in front of them, for 
just as subterranean waters nourish the roots of a plant, the fires of 
heaven are there to sustain their souls. 

The growth of fear is the starting point of love, and total purity 
is the foundation for theology.'^' 

When a man's senses are perfectly united to God, then what God 
has said is somehow mysteriously clarified. But where there is no 
union of this kind, then it is extremely difficult to speak about God. 

The consubstantiaP^^ Word brings purity to completion, and 
His presence destroys death, and when death is done away with, the 
disciple of sacred knowledge is illuminated. The Word of the Lord, 
being from the Lord, remains eternally pure. 

The man who does not know God speaks about Him only in 
probabilities. 

Purity makes of a disciple someone who can speak of God, and he 
can move on to a knowledge of the Trinity. 

He who loves the Lord has first loved his brother, for the latter is 
proof of the former. Someone who loves his neighbor will never tol- 



149. Literally: "somewhat commingled." 

150. I.e., of the passions. 

151. The knowledge of God from experience rather than from study. 
1.52. Or; "the indwelling Word" (cnousios). 



288 



THE LADDER OF DIVINE ASCEN T 



erate slanderers and will run from them as though from a fire. And 
the man who claims to love the Lord but is angry with his neighbor is 
like someone who dreams he is running. 

Hope is the power behind love. Hope is what causes us to look 
forward to the reward of love. Hope is an abundance of hidden trea- 
sure. It is the abundant assurance of the riches in store for us. It is a 
rest from labor, a doorway of love. It lifts despair and is the image of 
what is not yet present. When hope fails, so does love. Struggles are 
bound by it, labors depend on it, and mercy lies all around it. The 
hopeful monk slays despondency, kills it with his sword. Hope comes 
from the experience of the Lord's gifts, and someone with no such ex- 
perience must be ever in doubt. Hope is destroyed by anger, for hope 
does not disappoint and the angry man has no grace. 

Love grants prophecy, miracles. It is an abyss of illumination, a 
fountain of fire, bubbling up to inflame the thirsty soul. It is the con- 
dition of angels, and the progress of eternity. 

Most beautiful of all the virtues, tell us where you feed your 
flock, where you take your noonday rest (of. Song of Songs 1:7). En- 
lighten us, end our thirst, lead us, show us the way, since we long to 
soar up to you. You rule everything, and now you have enraptured 
my soul. I am unable to hold in your flame, and therefore I will go 
forward praising you. "You rule the power of the sea, you make gen- 
tle (and deaden) the surge of its waves. You make humble the proud 
thought as a wounded man. With your powerful arm you have scat- 
tered your enemies" (cf. Ps. 88:9-10), and you have made your lovers 
invincible. 

I long to know how Jacob saw you fixed above the ladder (cf. 
Gen. 28:12). That climb, how was it? Tell me, for I long to know. 
What is the mode, what is the law joining together those steps that 
the lover has set as an ascent in his heart? (cf. Ps. 83:6). I thirst to 
know the number of those steps, and the time required to climb them. 
He who discovered Your struggle and Your vision has spoken to us of 
the guides. But he would not — perhaps he could not — tell us any 
more. 

This empress,'''-' as if coming from heaven, spoke thus iti tny 
soul's hearing: "My love, you will never be able to knt>w how bcauti- 



15-1. I.e., love. HIM iiiliK "ih I iliiiit I iiii).;lii properly ■^■w Kiinj" I* f> (ioiH 



2K9 



ful 1 am unless you get away from the grossness of the flesh. So let 
this ladder teach you the spiritual union of the virtues. And I am 
there on the summit, for as the great man said, a man who knew me 
well: 'Remaining now are faith, hope, and love, these three. But love 
is the greatest of them all' (1 Cor. 13:13)." 



2')0 



A BRIEF SUMMARY AND 
EXHORTATION 



Ascend, my brothers, ascend eagerly.. Let your hearts' resolve be 
to climb. Listen to the voice of the one who says: "Come, let us go up 
to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of our God" (Isa. 2:3), Who 
makes our feet to be like the feet of the deer, "Who sets us on the high 
places, that we may be triumphant on His road" (Hab. 3:I9).i5'* 

Run, I beg you, run with him who said, "Let us hurry until we 
all arrive at the unity of faith and of the knowledge of God, at mature 
manhood, at the measure of the stature of Christ's fullness" (Eph. 
4:13). Baptized in the thirtieth year of His earthly age, Christ attained 
the thirtieth step on the spiritual ladder, for God indeed is love, and 
to Him be praise, dominion, power. In Him is the cause, past, pres- 
ent, and future, of all that is good forever and ever. Amen. 



154. iikiijii. 11 TM rnids "with Mn voti((" (w/r) ■[he ic\iiii rciTiHin nl lUli 1 IM It 
oJi but SinmtiiMi.s, k'liiii pniiiu, liin ih/h 



MJ| 



